Project Gutenberg's The Sins of the Cities of the Plain, by Jack Saul

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Sins of the Cities of the Plain
       or, The Recollections of a Mary-Ann, with Short Essays on
       Sodomy and Tribadism

Author: Jack Saul

Release Date: January 14, 2017 [EBook #53964]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SINS OF CITIES OF THE PLAIN ***




Produced by M.K., Martin Pettit, Stanford University,
British Library and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by Stanford University.)






+-------------------------------------------------+
|Transcriber's note:                              |
|                                                 |
|THIS BOOK IS PORNOGRAPHIC IN NATURE AND CONTAINS |
|EXPLICIT LANGUAGE.                               |
|                                                 |
|Obvious typographic errors have been corrected.  |
|                                                 |
|The Table of Contents has been moved to the      |
|beginning.                                       |
|                                                 |
+-------------------------------------------------+


THE SINS OF THE CITIES OF THE PLAIN


_Only 250 copies printed._




TABLE OF CONTENTS

--:o:--

                                        PAGE
VOL. I. RECOLLECTIONS OF A MARY-ANN
(_Introduction_)                           7

JACK SAUL'S RECOLLECTIONS                 27

VOL. II. JACK SAUL'S RECOLLECTIONS
(_continued_)                              7

FURTHER RECOLLECTIONS AND INCIDENTS       53

THE SAME OLD STORY                       100

A SHORT ESSAY ON SODOMY, ETC.            107

TRIBADISM                                118




THE SINS

OF THE

CITIES OF THE PLAIN

OR THE

_RECOLLECTIONS OF A MARY-ANN_

WITH SHORT ESSAYS ON

SODOMY AND TRIBADISM

»--:o:--«
IN TWO VOLUMES
»--:o:--«

VOLUME I.

[Illustration: Decoration]

LONDON

PRIVATELY PRINTED

1881


[Illustration: Decoration]




RECOLLECTIONS

OF A

MARY-ANN

--:o:--

_INTRODUCTION_


The writer of these notes was walking through Leicester Square one sunny
afternoon last November, when his attention was particularly taken by an
effeminate, but very good-looking young fellow, who was walking in front
of him, looking in shop-windows from time to time, and now and then
looking round as if to attract my attention.

Dressed in tight-fitting clothes, which set off his Adonis-like figure
to the best advantage, especially about what snobs call the fork of his
trousers, where evidently he was favoured by nature by a very
extraordinary development of the male appendages; he had small and
elegant feet, set off by pretty patent leather boots, a fresh looking
beardless face, with almost feminine features, auburn hair, and
sparkling blue eyes, which spoke as plainly as possible to my senses,
and told me that the handsome youth must indeed be one of the
"Mary-Ann's" of London, who I had heard were often to be seen sauntering
in the neighbourhood of Regent Street, or the Haymarket, on fine
afternoons or evenings.

Presently the object of my curiosity almost halted and stood facing the
writer as he took off his hat, and wiped his face with a beautiful white
silk handkerchief.

That lump in his trousers had quite a fascinating effect upon me. Was it
natural or made up by some artificial means? If real, what a size when
excited; how I should like to handle such a manly jewel, etc. All this
ran through my mind, and determined me to make his acquaintance, in
order to unravel the real and naked truth; also, if possible, to glean
what I could of his antecedents and mode of life, which I felt sure must
be extraordinarily interesting.

When he moved on again I noticed that he turned down a little side
street, and was looking in a picture shop. I followed him, and first
making some observations about the scanty drapery on some of the
actresses and other beauties whose photographs were exposed for sale, I
asked him if he would take a glass of wine.

He appeared to comprehend that there was business in my proposal, but
seemed very diffident about drinking in any public place.

"Well," I said, "would you mind if we take a cab to my chambers--I live
in the Cornwall Mansions, close to Baker Street Station--have a cigar
and a chat with me, as I see you are evidently a fast young chap, and
can put me up to a thing or two?"

"All right. Put your thing up, I suppose you mean. Why do you seem so
afraid to say what you want?" he replied with a most meaning look.

"I'm not at all delicate; but wish to keep myself out of trouble. Who
can tell who hears you out in the streets?" I said, hailing a cab. "I
don't like to be seen speaking to a young fellow in the street. We shall
be all right in my own rooms."

It was just about my dinner hour when we reached my place, so I rang the
bell, and ordered my old housekeeper to lay the table for two, and both
of us did ample justice to a good rumpsteak and oyster sauce, topped up
with a couple of bottles of champagne of an extra sec brand.

As soon as the cloth was removed, we settled ourselves comfortably over
the fire with brandy and cigars, for it was a sharp, frosty day out.

"My boy, I hope you enjoyed your dinner?" I said, mixing a couple of
good warm glasses of brandy hot, "but you have not favoured me with your
name. Mine you could have seen by the little plate on my door, is Mr.
Cambon."

"Saul, Jack Saul, sir, of Lisle Street, Leicester Square, and ready for
a lark with a free gentleman at any time. What was it made you take a
fancy to me? Did you observe any particularly interesting points about
your humble servant?" as he slyly looked down towards the prominent part
I have previously mentioned.

"You seem a fine figure, and so evidently well hung that I had quite a
fancy to satisfy my curiosity about it. Is it real or made up for show?"
I asked.

"As real as my face, sir, and a great deal prettier. Did you ever see a
finer tosser in your life?" he replied, opening his trousers and
exposing a tremendous prick, which was already in a half-standing state.
"It's my only fortune, sir; but it really provides for all I want, and
often introduces me to the best of society, ladies as well as gentlemen.
There isn't a girl about Leicester Square but what would like to have me
for her man, but I find it more to my interest not to waste my strength
on women; the pederastic game pays so well, and is quite as enjoyable. I
wouldn't have a woman unless well paid for it."

He was gently frigging himself as he spoke, and had a glorious stand by
the time he had finished, so throwing the end of my cigar into the fire,
I knelt down by his side to examine that fine plaything of his.

Opening his trousers more, I brought everything into full view--a
priapus nearly ten inches long, very thick, and underhung by a most
glorious pair of balls, which were surrounded and set off by quite a
profusion of light auburn curls.

How I handled those appendages, the sack of which was drawn up so
deliciously tight, which is a sure sign of strength, and that they have
not been enervated by too excessive fucking or frigging. I hate to see
balls hang loosely down, or even a fine prick with very small or
scarcely any stones to it--these half-and-half tools are an abomination.

Gently frigging him, I tongued the ruby head for a minute or two, till
he called out, "Hold, hold, sir, or you will get it in your mouth!"

This was not my game; I wanted to see him spend, so removing my lips, I
pointed that splendid tool outwards over the hearthrug and frigged him
quickly. Almost in a moment it came; first a single thick clot was
ejected, like a stone from a volcano, then quite a jet of sperm went
almost a yard high, and right into the fire, where it fizzled on the
red-hot coals.

"By Jove, what a spend!" I exclaimed, "we will strip now, and have some
better fun, Jack. I want to see you completely naked, my boy, as there
is nothing so delightful as to see a fine young fellow when well formed
and furnished in every respect. Will you suck me? That is what I like
first; frigging you has only given me half a cockstand at present."

"You must be generous if I do, or you will not get me to come and see
you here again," he answered with a smile, which had almost a girlish
sweetness of expression.

We were soon stripped to the buff, and having locked the door, I sat
down with my beautiful youth on my knee, we kissed each other, and he
thrust his tongue most wantonly into my mouth, as my hands fairly
travelled all over his body; but that glorious prick of his claimed most
attention, and I soon had it again in a fine state of erection.

"Now kneel down and gamahuche me," I said, "whilst I can frig your
lovely prick with my foot."

Seemingly to enter thoroughly into the spirit of the thing, he was on
his knees in a moment, between my legs, and began to fondle my still
rather limp pego most deliciously, taking the head fully into his
voluptuously warm mouth, and rolling his tongue round the prepuce in the
most lascivious manner it is possible to imagine.

I stiffened up at once under such exciting tittillations, which seemed
to have a like effect upon his prick, which I could feel with my toes to
be as hard as a rolling-pin, as my foot gently frigged and rolled it on
his bended thigh, and he soon spent over my sole as it gently continued
the exciting friction.

I now gave myself more and more to his gamahuching, now and then seizing
his head with both hands, and raising his face to mine, we indulged in
luscious love kisses, which prolonged my pleasure almost indefinitely.
At last I allowed him to bring me to a crisis, and he swallowed every
drop of my spendings with evident relish.

After resting awhile, and taking a little more stimulant, I asked him
how he had come to acquire such a decided taste for gamahuching, to do
it so deliciously as he did.

"That would be too long a tale to go into now," he replied. "Some other
day, if you like to make it worth my while, I will give you the whole
history."

"Could you write it out, or give me an outline so that I might put it
into the shape of a tale?"

"Certainly; but it would take me so much time that you would have to
make me a present of at least twenty pounds. It would take during three
or four weeks several hours a day."

"I don't mind a fiver a week if you give me a fair lot, say thirty or
forty pages of note-paper a week, tolerably well written," I replied.

And the arrangement was made for him to compile me "The Recollections of
a Mary-Ann," which I suggested ought to be the title, although he seemed
not at all to like the name as applied to himself, saying that that was
what the low girls of his neighbourhood called him if they wished to
insult him, however, he said at last, "the four fivers will make up for
that."

"Now," he added, "I suppose you would like me to put it up for you, or
rather into myself. But can you lend me such a thing as a birch? You are
not so young as I am, and want something to stimulate you; besides, I
want you to do it well, as I fancy that moderate sized cock of yours
immensely. Do you know that I am sure I like a nice man to fuck me as
much as ever a woman could?"

The birch was produced, and he insisted upon tying me down over the easy
chair, so that I could not flinch or get away from the application of
the rod.

He began very steadily, and with light stinging cuts which soon made me
aware that I had a rather accomplished young schoolmaster to deal with
my posteriors, which began to tingle most pleasantly after a few
strokes. The sting of each cut was sharp, but the warm, burning rush of
blood to the parts had such an exciting effect that, although I fairly
writhed and wriggled under each stroke, I was rapidly getting into a
most delicious state of excitement.

The light tips of the birch seemed to search out each tender spot,
twining round my buttocks and thighs, touching up both shaft and balls,
as well as wealing my ham, till I was most rampantly erect, and cried
out for him to let me have him at once.

"Not yet; not yet, you bugger. You want to get into my arse, do you?
I'll teach you to fuck arseholes, my boy!" he exclaimed, chuckling over
my mingled pain and excitement.

"How do you like that--and that--and that--and that?" The last stroke
was so painful that it almost took my breath away, and I knew he had
fairly drawn blood.

I was furious, my prick felt red-hot, almost ready to burst, when he
unloosed my hands and ancles.

I seized him in a perfect fury of lust. His prick was also standing like
a bar of iron; he had got so excited by my flagellation. He was turned
round, and made to kneel upon the chair at once, presenting his bottom
to my attack. No one to look at it would have thought the pinky and
wrinkled little hole had ever been much used, except for the necessary
offices of nature. The sight was perfectly maddening; it looked so
delicious.

As I stopped for a moment to lubricate the head of my prick with saliva,
he put his fingers in his mouth, and then wetted the little hole
himself, to make it as easy as possible for me.

Coming to the charge, I found him delightfully tight, but I got in
slowly as he helped me as much as possible by directing the head of my
cock with his hand, whilst I had him round the waist and handled that
beautiful tool of his, which added immensely to my pleasure. At last I
felt fairly in, but did not want to spend too soon, so only moved very
slowly, enjoying the sense of possession and the delicious pressures
which he evidently so well knew how to apply.

My frigging soon brought him to a spend, and catching it all in my
hands, I rubbed the creamy essence of life up and down his prick and
over his balls, and even on my own cock as it drew in and out of his
bottom.

My delight was perfectly indescribable. I drew it out so long, always
stopping for a little when the spending crisis seemed imminent, but at
last his writhings and pressures had such an irresistible effect that I
could no longer restrain the flood of sperm I had tried so long to keep
back, and feeling it shoot from me in a red-hot stream, the agonizing
delight made both of us give vent to perfect howls of extasy.

We both nearly fainted, but my instrument was so hard and inflamed that
it was a long time before it in the least began to abate its stiffness.

It was still in his bottom, revelling in the well-lubricated hole, and
he would fain have worked me up to the very crisis again, but I was
afraid of exhausting myself too much at one time, so gradually allowed
Mr. Pego to assume his normal size, and slip out of that delicious
orifice which had given me such pleasure.

A week after this first introduction Jack came again, and brought the
first instalment of his rough notes, from which this MS. is compiled.

Of course at each visit we had a delicious turn at bottom-fucking, but
as the recital of the same kind of thing over and over again is likely
to pall upon my readers, I shall omit a repetition of our numerous
orgies of lust, all very similar to the foregoing, and content myself by
a simple recital of his adventures.


[Illustration: Decoration]




JACK SAUL'S

RECOLLECTIONS

EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF THE

PEDERASTIC IDEAS IN HIS

YOUTHFUL MIND


DEAR SIR,--

I need scarcely tell you that little cocks, and everything relating to
them, had a peculiar interest to me from the very earliest time it is
possible for my memory to carry me back to.

I have a brother much older than myself, and have heard him say that
almost as soon as I could walk I would toddle up to anybody and ask them
if they had a dilly; that lifting girls' clothes, or putting my hands on
boys or even grown-up people was a regular thing with me.

My parents were well-to-do people of the farmer class, in Suffolk, and I
have been told of a laughable incident when I was only about six years
old.

There was a family party, and at teatime my cousin Jenny, a fine girl of
about seventeen, who was slightly disfigured by a very hirsute
appearance about her upper lip, was seated opposite to me, and
particularly attracted my attention, it being the first time I had ever
seen her. I was so absorbed in contemplating her moustache that I could
not take my eyes off her, so that she quite blushed.

At last I broke out. "What have you got girl's clothes on for? I don't
believe you are a girl at all. My brother Dick has got a moustache just
like yours."

"Hush, for shame, Johnny; be quiet, do," said my mother, giving me quite
a severe pat, whilst the object of my remarks flushed crimson, as tears
of shame started to her eyes.

"I won't. I know she's a boy. See if I don't find out whether she's
cracked like a girl, or got a spout like a tea-kettle on her!" I cried
out, but was not allowed to say more, as I was cuffed and driven in
disgrace from the room, whilst poor Jenny also rose from the table to
retire and have a good cry over her humiliation.

About twelve years afterwards, when Jenny was a married woman,
happening to be left alone with her for a short time one day, I recalled
the incident to her memory, in fact I believe she never forgot it, as
she used always to regard me with a most peculiar kind of look.

How she blushed at first; but putting my arms round her waist, I asked
her to kiss and forgive me, if it was such a long time ago.

"You know, Jack, I will. You were such a tit then," she replied, as she
permitted me to take the kiss.

"But, Jenny, I love you so, and am as curious as ever. Can you forgive
that?"

Her eyes looked anywhere but in my face, as she blushed and seemed
deeply moved, so I redoubled my osculatory attentions till I had raised
quite a storm of desire in both our heaving bosoms.

She was married to a rather old and ugly fellow, whose money had caught
the silly butterfly, who thought that wealth alone could secure
happiness.

You may guess the result. A friendly sofa was at hand. We sank down upon
it, and, in spite of her pretended resistance, I not only investigated
the crack of love but got into it. She was one of those hairy, lustful
women one occasionally meets with, and when she had once tasted the fine
root I introduced into her cunt (which was already swimming in spendings
before Mr. Pego could present his head), she could scarcely ever be
satisfied; in fact, we ran awful risks. When I was stopping in the house
she would leave her husband asleep and come to my room, and when she
had fairly fucked me to a standstill, would suck my prick, slap my arse,
bugger me with her finger, and do everything she could think of to get
even a tenth or eleventh go out of me.

I was sent to a boarding-school at Colchester when about ten years of
age. Here the boys all slept by twos in a bed.

Well do I remember the first night. My bedfellow, a big boy of about
fifteen, his name was Freeman, at once began to handle me all over as
soon as the lights were out. His hands soon found my cock, which young
as I then was, was a fine one for my age--somehow it was already stiff.

"My eyes," he whispered, "you've got a good 'un. Feel mine; it is
hardly bigger than yours," as he directed my young hands to another
equally stiff prick.

"Rub it up and down," he whispered again; "that is what we all do. Do
you like it?"

My body was in a tremble all over, and presently, as I continued the up
and down motion of my hand on his cock, it was wetted all over with a
warm, slimy kind of stuff which he shot into my hand.

"Don't you know what that is, Jack? Perhaps you're not old enough to
come like that; we call it spendings," he whispered. "It's so nice. We
often put our cocks in each other's bottoms, and spend there. Would you
like to try that on me?"

At first I would not, but he at length got me to promise and try, as I
should be sure to find it so nice.

He turned his bum to me, and wetting both his hole and the tip of my
affair with spittle, he himself directed my cock to the place, and
pushed out his arse towards me.

I did my best by shoving, and somehow it seemed to come quite natural,
for I soon got in, and found my prick for the first time in a
deliciously moist, warm, and tight sheath.

"Push in and out, in and out," he whispered, suiting the action of his
rump to his instructions.

I liked it immensely, and clung with my arms round his buttocks, working
with all my will, till at last a sudden thrill seemed to come upon me
with a kind of shooting sensation in my cock. We both stopped out of
breath, as if something had happened, and I suppose that was my first
spend.

The other boys seemed all very quiet that first night, but the next
evening, as soon as we had retired to our room, Freeman at once
introduced little Jack to the other half-dozen occupants of our room
(there were four beds) as a highly fit and proper chum.

"See, boys, what a fine prick the little fellow has got. He fucked my
arse all night last night, and had his first spend," he said, lifting my
shirt and exposing my affair, which was already as stiff as a poker at
the idea of another go like the previous night.

They all crowded round to handle and admire what they called a wonder
for such a little 'un.

Presently all were quite naked, each prick was stiff, and we compared
one with another. The next thing was to draw lots who should have my
bottom first, and luckily for me the boy with the very smallest prick in
the room drew the desired prize. He was about fourteen, but such a
pretty fair little fellow that I quite loved him at once.

His first action was to come and kiss me, then with one arm around my
waist, stood belly to belly, and rubbed his much smaller prick against
mine.

Just then one suggested that unless we blocked up the window the light
would betray us, so as they wished to retain the candles in use, they
took a couple of blankets off the beds, and put them up so as
effectually to darken the windows.

The next thing was to make me lean over the bed on my face, so as to
offer my bottom fairly to the attack of my young lover; they next took a
little pomade from a pot, and put some both on my little hole as well as
the head of his prick.

Being small there was not much difficulty about his getting in, and he
soon began to afford me great pleasure, especially when, putting his
arms round to my front, he began to frig my stiff member.

Looking round to see all that was going on, I found my lover also had
one in his bottom, and the whole of them soon formed a perfect string in
action, each one in the bottom in front of him, making a chain of eight
links. There seemed quite a kind of electricity about it, as I fancied
I felt all the pricks in my bottom by turns, and when at last it came to
the spending crisis, one and all came together with cries of delight;
whilst I also bedewed the hands of my partner with a few drops of spend,
as I almost fainted from excessive emotion.

Of course other nights we changed places and partners, sometimes going
in for a general suck all round and giving our bottoms a rest.

I got so fond of having a cock in my mouth that I could have eaten them,
and at that time liked it better than anything.

I only stopped at that school a fortnight, for I was both fortunate and
unfortunate at the same time.

My father was killed by accident, and mother had to take me home,
because his affairs turned out so badly she could not afford to pay for
my schooling; which, as it turned out, thus prevented my constitution
being ruined for life by such early precocity; besides, it was all found
out and the school broken up soon afterwards.

You may be sure these early impressions took a deep hold of my naturally
warm disposition, although I had very few opportunities of again
indulging. I knew it was wrong to do such things, and whenever I did
happen to get a young friend for a bedfellow, never failed to try on for
a mutual frig.

I would lay beside a fresh companion till I fairly shivered with
emotion, and would wait till he was asleep, or pretended to be so, my
cock all the time as stiff as a bar of iron; then my hands would slyly
and gradually slip under his nightshirt, and slowly work to the all
attractive spot, gently try a few soft pressures till the cock began to
respond to my caresses by a very perceptible swelling; then I got
bolder, and generally my bedfellow would turn over and reciprocate my
dalliances till we joined in a mutual fuck between each other's thighs,
belly to belly. My favorite idea was to pull back the skin of my
foreskin, and doing the same to my bedfellow's prick, bring the nose of
his affair to mine, then draw the skin of mine over the heads of both
cocks, and fuck each other gently so. What delicious thrills we had when
spending, the seed seeming to shoot backwards and forwards from one to
the other! Only those who have done it can at all realize such
delicious sensations. Very seldom have I found a youth reject my
caresses, although many of them would keep quite passive, and let me do
everything.

Next day I could hardly ever look them in the face, but generally found
them quite ready for another spree at night.

But so few chances occurred to me, and then only for a day or two at a
time.

However, I met with an adventure with the other sex when I was nearly
fourteen.

We had a young dairymaid about eighteen, a fine dark-eyed wench, very
good looking, a strapping big, strong young woman, with rare plump arms
and splendid full bosom, whilst as to her development of rump, to judge
from the appearance outside her clothes, it was something superb.

My bedroom was in a garret at the top of the farmhouse, and a ricketty
old staircase led up to my door, and then with a twist to the other
side, without any landing, you could step up to Sarah's room (she was
our only servant); so it was little more than a step across from my door
to hers. At the bottom of our staircase there was a door which we could
bolt inside, and so be secure from burglars or the other inmates of the
house, unless they fairly broke in.

Of an afternoon, after she had done milking and all her work, Sarah used
to go up to her room to wash and dress, and I noticed that even by
daytime she bolted the staircase door. My curiosity was aroused, so
slipping up to my room sometimes before her time for dressing, I used to
take off my heavy shoes and watch her dressing through the keyhole of
her door, but I never saw very much except those lovely titties and neck
in the process of washing or changing her frock.

This went on for some days, and my elder brother being away at the time,
I used to lay and think about Sarah for hours after going to bed; yet I
dared not venture to do anything, and in fact was ignorant of almost
everything about the opposite sex.

One afternoon, being rather more clumsy than usual, I stumbled against
her door just as I was going to apply my eye to the keyhole, and not
being fastened it flew wide open, exposing Miss Sarah in the very act
of admiring her fine bosom in front of a small glass. How she blushed
for a moment, but recovering herself at once, exclaimed: "Well I never,
Master Jack. What do you think you will see now?"

I stammered out an excuse, but she asked me into her room, saying, with
a laugh, "I know you thought you would see my legs or something, now,
didn't you?"

"I know I did. You won't tell mother, will you, Sarah? I've often seen
your beautiful big breasts, and wanted to see----"

"I never tell tales, Jack, if you don't. What did you want to see? Tell
me," she said, with a most tantalising smile.

My assurance returned as I found she was not cross, so I told her that
it was her fine bum that I so very much wished to see, adding that I
would give a shilling to see it just for a moment, as I was sure it was
a beauty.

"I don't want your money, dear," she replied; "but will you kiss it if I
let you have a peep?"

"That I will," I eagerly replied. "Only let me lift your skirts, Sarah."

"And I must look at your's, Jack, and kiss it. Is it a bargain, dear?"

"I'll show as much as you do for a spree, so make haste," was my answer.

"What a nice little fellow you are. Give me a kiss first, and then we'll
have a romp. Would you like to come and sleep in my bed at night, dear?"
she asked, and I felt my breath almost sucked away, as she squeezed and
hugged me to her heaving bosom. You may be sure I liked nothing better,
and assured her so.

As if by magic her skirts dropped down to her heels, and in a moment
Sarah was dancing round the room with nothing on but her chemise,
affording me exquisite glimpses of her splendid fat bum, and a soft
brown muff which ornamented the lower part of her belly in front.

"Off with your things, Jack, before I'll let you kiss me, make haste, or
your bum shall smart in the twinkling of an eye," she exclaimed, dancing
up to me, her rosy face an animation and a devilment in her looks I had
never seen before.

My face was burning. Her daring immodesty seemed to make me quite
shamefaced, and I felt so abashed I hardly knew how to speak.

"How you blush, Jack; did you never see a girl before?" she asked,
seeming to take pleasure in increasing my embarrassment. She kissed me
again and again, as she almost tore my clothes off, till nothing but my
shirt afforded the least protection against her ardent glances.

"Slip off that ugly rag, as I do," she exclaimed, letting her chemise
drop, and thus abandoning the last slight protection to her nakedness.
"I must hug you to my naked body, dear; it is so nice."

"Now kiss me, and I'll kiss you," she said in a soft, excitable voice,
as she pushed me on to the bed. "Your little plaything is so stiff and
beautiful, I mean to fondle it, while you kiss my bum!"

I resigned myself entirely to her directions, and laying on my back on
the middle of the bed, she got over me face downwards, so that her open
thighs just brought a hairy covered crack right over my face and almost
blindfolded me as she pressed it down to my lips, which seemed
instinctively to imprint kisses on what I had just previously been
almost afraid to see.

Quicker than I can put it on paper, she had hold of my standing affair.
At first she kissed my belly and thighs, laid her warm cheek by the side
of my cock, then I felt her kissing its head, as her hands gently drew
back my foreskin, and presently I could tell that it was well in her
warm mouth, and being deliciously sucked, which made me repay her in
the most ardent manner possible. My own tongue visited the lips of her
crack, and I sucked and thrust it in as far as it would reach.

How she sucked at my pego, as she wriggled her crack over my lips, but
it did not last long before she let down a regular flood of thick creamy
spendings, which so excited me that I came also at once and shot my
juvenile tribute into her mouth, as she greedily swallowed every drop.

"There, there," she said, almost with a sigh, "we've done it, Jack. It's
so naughty; but isn't it nice, dear?"

Then she presently slowly raised herself off my body, and we lay for a
short time side by side on the bed, kissing and toying with the most
attractive charms of each other's person, till at last she jumped up
and begged me to dress quickly for fear mamma should be calling for us.

"Take your things, and run into your own room, and be sure not even to
look at me before anyone, or it will be sure to be noticed; and you know
you can come and cuddle me again all night when they are all in bed."

As I sat at tea that afternoon I could scarcely eat or drink; nothing
but the delights I had tasted with Sarah and anticipations of the coming
night would run through my fevered brain, whilst my poor little cock
every now and then stiffened again in my breeches, till I hardly knew
how to restrain my feelings.

I tried to read a fairy tale, but it was useless, and at last my mamma,
noticing how I kept flushing up, sent me off to bed about eight o'clock.

Ours was an early family, everyone generally getting to bed by ten
o'clock; but how to pass those two long hours of expectation I was quite
at a loss, as I lay tossing about on my bed with one hand gently
frigging my awfully stiff affair.

However, I must have fallen asleep, as I well remember waking up in the
dark and feeling someone in the bed, with her arms round me, and warm
lips kissing my cheeks.

"It's only Sarah, Jack. I did not expect you would go to sleep and
forget me so soon. Shall I go back to my own bed, dear?" she whispered
in a low voice.

"No, no. Oh, pray don't, I love you so!" I whispered in return, as I
began to repay her loving kisses.

"Let us both go into my room; the bed is more comfortable for two," she
said, so we at once adjourned to her apartment and were soon comfortably
cuddling one another again.

"Jack," she whispered "did you ever have any rude games with the boys at
school?"

So I at once told her about my adventures, and how we used to put our
cocks up each other's bottoms, etc.

I felt her actually tremble with suppressed excitement as she so
nervously clasped me in her arms whilst I was telling her all about it.

"Don't you then know what a girl is like? I mean you didn't know till
we kissed each other this afternoon, did you?" she asked.

"No; but I liked kissing you there, Sarah," I replied, as one of my
hands indicated the spot. "May I do it again?"

"No; we'll play at mothers and fathers. You shall put your dear little
prick in there. That's how babies are made by men and women, only we
shan't do that," she said, as she very gently drew me upon her, and
opened her legs and directed my pego to the gap of love, which was so
longing to receive the little morsel.

I felt she was quite wet, and my affair glided into the well-lubricated
aperture with the greatest of ease; but how deliciously warm it was! and
I could feel the folds of her cunt close on my prick so delightfully
that I at once began fucking as quickly as possible, glueing my lips to
her's and pushing my tongue between her amorous lips, as she almost
sucked my breath away. How she heaved up her bottom, and clasping her
arms tightly round my slender body, kept me from being unseated by her
restive steed.

"Oh! oh! oh, Jack! I'm coming, you darling--you duck of a boy, how you
make me spend! Ah--r--r--r--re!" and she seemed almost to stiffen her
body at the moment, whilst my cock, balls, and thighs were deluged by
her thick creamy juice, which also trickled all down the crack of her
bottom. Presently she recovered a little, and putting one hand down to
my affair, withdrew it from her reeking cunt, and pointed it to the
little hole just below, whispering as she did so, "Push in there, dear.
Don't spend in my pussey, as even a boy like you might make me a baby if
you come there; besides, I long to know what it is like. It must be
nice, or the boys at school wouldn't do it."

"Oh! oh! it hurts though," she sighed, as I pushed on, and gradually
progressed little by little; still it very evidently was anything but a
painless operation, to judge from her sighs and suppressed murmurs. At
last, however, I was chock-a-block, as the sailors say, and she gave me
a kiss of satisfaction at having achieved our purpose.

"Now go on, Jack. It feels so nice, and excites me so."

At the same time her legs were thrown over my loins, and she heaved up
her arse to every stroke of my living piston.

So tight, such a deliciously warm and throbbing sheath, delighted my
little prick--I cannot describe how I felt; but it must have swollen up
immensely. It felt ready to burst, and almost directly I felt the
electric shootings which give such intense pleasure in the act of
emission. My very soul seemed to melt into her vitals under these
blissful sensations.

"How beautifully warm; how I feel it shoot up into me! Ah, this beats
everything I ever felt before!" she sighed, kissing and hugging me in
rapturous extasy.

"No, my love," I laughed. "You never felt it before when you have it in
your bottom. I'm so pleased that you like our way, as I also like this
little hole best."

She made me repeat the game without withdrawing, and all night long we
were kissing and sucking each other's parts, till just as it was getting
light we fell into a sound sleep in each other's arms.

After this first night we always slept together, but she would not
always let me fuck her, as she told me too much of it might injure my
health.

One morning she confided to me the secret that she often got a nice fuck
in the cowhouse from our boy Joe, who assisted her in the milking. "And
what do you think, Jack, I get him to do sometimes? Why, there is a long
stool there which we put under one of the quietest cows that has
beautiful long tits, then I lay myself on my back on the stool, and he
puts one of the cow's tits right into my pussey and milks it right into
me. It's beautiful, it's delicious, beats everything; no man is at all
so good. It makes me come so when I feel the rush of the warm milk right
up into my very womb. You shall see it, Jack, this very afternoon. I'll
tell Joe you're all right, and we can have a good lark together, as your
mamma is going on a visit somewhere this afternoon directly after
dinner."

This was a chance for me. I had long wanted to get intimate with master
Joe, who was a fine, plump, good-looking, ruddy-faced boy of seventeen,
but he had always seemed so distant and shy, even to me his mistress's
son; in fact it now seemed another instance of how "still waters run
deep," as I thought how curious it was that he should be so free with
Sarah.

As soon as my unsuspecting parent had started on her way, Sarah and I
went to the cowhouse, where Joe met us with a smile of pleasure as we
entered.

"Now, Joe," she said on entering, "let's get the work done as quickly as
possible, and milk them all but Cowslip. Then you shall let Master Jack
see how you milk her into me."

I had not long to wait, for there were only seven cows in all, and
presently the long stool was placed under Cowslip, and Sarah stretched
herself upon it, so as to bring her cunt just under the udder of the
good-tempered creature, who seemed quite used to the trick, putting her
nose to Sarah's face with quite an affectionate kind of kiss.

Joe quickly turned up her skirts till he quite exposed her belly up to
the navel, then taking one of the cow's teats, he handled it a little,
but not with a milking motion--it seemed to harden at once like a
natural prick--and then inserting it into Sarah's cunt, he began the
milking.

Her eyes seemed at once to sparkle with quite an unusual kind of
brilliancy, as she exclaimed, "Go on, go on quick; it's beautiful!"
heaving up her rump as if a man was fucking her, whilst it was most
exciting to see the white milk spurting from her cunt at every fresh
injection, running down the crack of her bottom and thighs, or hanging
in pearly dewdrops about the silky brown moss which adorned her lovely
mount.

My prick had been standing all the while I had been there, but this
sight filled me with the most lustful desires, and I could also see by
the protuberance of Joe's breeches that he also was in the same state,
as his eyes were intently watching the operation of his hand, the
twitching of her cunt, and every motion of lascivious girl.

I fairly shook with emotion, but with trembling hands I began to undo
his breeches, and pulled them down to his knees.

Heavens! what a lovely prick stood before my starting eyes!

I nervously grasped it in my hand, and kneeling down printed hot and
luscious kisses on its fiery head as I pulled back the foreskin. I
could eat such a delicious morsel, and longed to swallow every drop of
the pearly juice I knew my caresses would soon cause to spurt from his
lovely cock. I took it fairly in my mouth, sucking quite ravenously, and
rolling my tongue around it in the most wanton manner, whilst my hands
were busy caressing a splendid pair of balls, contained in a tightly
drawn up round purse, richly ornamented with almost black hair, which
hung below the root of his white and bursting shaft.

Almost with a scream, he spent at once, as he shouted in extasy, "I'm
coming; oh! oh!! oh-!!! you darling Jack," shoving his prick so fiercely
into my mouth as almost to choke me as the hot juice spurted down my
throat, to my infinite delight.

Presently he recovered a little, and changing the teats, went on
milking into the delighted Sarah's cunt. She afterwards told me that the
sight of Joe fucking me in my mouth seemed to double her pleasure.

Rising from my knees, I now let down my own trousers, and presented my
own glowing prick to Joe's arsehole behind (for I was quite as tall as
he was). He stooped a little so as to thrust out his bottom and
facilitate my attack, so wetting my fingers in a pail of milk, I applied
them to his fundament, moistening the head of my prick at the same time.
He was evidently a maiden behind, and I had great difficulty in getting
well in, but I had my arms round him, frigging his fine prick in front,
and both were so excited that although I made him wince, as well as
hurting myself, at last it was done.

"Ah! it's feeling nice now; push on, Master Jack. Fuck me well, frig
away; I'm coming again. Oh! oh! I can't stop; do spend in me!" he cried.

Believe me, I did spend. I never had had such an emission before. It
seemed to keep throbbing and shooting for ever so long and my prick grew
both in size and length that day. It had never seemed so big and
inflamed in any previous encounter with boys or Sally.

Whenever my mother was away we repeated these amusements, and I often
also found chances of having Joe's tight arsehole on the sly, and he
also obliged me the same way, but we never told Sarah for fear she
should prove jealous. In fact now and then she expressed her suspicions
of my love for Joe, as naturally it made me slightly remiss in my
attentions to herself.

Soon after reaching the age of sixteen my mother succeeded in getting me
placed at Messrs. Cygnet and Ego's, a large West End linendrapery house,
which had a most aristocratic connection.

Here morals were very strictly looked after, and it was quite impossible
for the youths to indulge in any sensual amusements in the dormitories.

In a few weeks my prick became so awfully troublesome for want of
employment that I often had to retire to the closet to frig myself on
the sly. The sight of the many handsome girls and young fellows had a
perfectly maddening effect upon me, especially as they were all
forbidden fruit, and I verily believe I should have ventured to risk it
with some one, if chance had not favoured me with an adventure which
afforded the necessary relief.

Early one afternoon, as I was busy behind the counter, I heard some one
speaking to our principal shopwalker.

"Send a good variety of patterns, Mr. Gooser, let him bring them about
four o'clock; my sister will then be at liberty to look them over."

Something seemed to strike me that I was indicated; so looking up I saw
a very handsome young lady with an equally handsome man of about thirty,
who was evidently her brother, speaking to the shopwalker.

"Certainly, my lord; he shall wait upon her ladyship without fail," I
heard him say as he bowed them out of the shop.

Directly they were gone I received orders to go to Churton House,
Piccadilly, the mansion of the Marquis of Churton, with quite a cab-load
of rolls of silk for selection by the lovely lady, who I now found to be
the Hon. Lady Diana Furbelow, his sister.

The portly flunkeys who ushered me up to her ladyship's boudoir were
most obsequious in their attentions to me, and carried all my parcels up
as well. In fact I was quite at a loss to account for such respect being
shown to one who I knew in their hearts they merely regarded as a young
counter-jumper.

"What is your name, sir?" said her ladyship, looking up from a book
which she was reading as she reclined on an ottoman in a kind of loose
dressing-gown, having evidently discarded her dress after her morning
drive.

"Mr. Saul, at your ladyship's service, with a lot of silks for selection
from Cygnet and Ego's. Will your ladyship be pleased to have them
brought up?"

"Bring them up, James, and tell William I want some wine and biscuits,
as I may keep this gentleman some time making the selection. When there
are so many beautiful patterns it is so difficult to make up one's mind.
Pray be seated, sir, for I'm sure they keep you on your legs long enough
in those nigger-driving shops."

There was an indefinable something, besides the kindness of her manners,
which at once put me at my ease with this beautiful lady, and my prick
was so mannerless as to stand at once under the influence of her soft,
loving eyes, eyes of an etherean blue, set under a lovely pair of dark
eyebrows and ornamented with a fringe of dark lashes, through which she
seemed to look at you.

There was just a slight perceptible flush on her pale cheeks, and to add
to the charm of her exceeding beauty, she had a splendid chevelure of
really golden hair, small pearly teeth, and cherry lips, which almost
made me beside myself to contemplate.

"Help yourself to a glass of wine, Mr. Saul," she said. "You must need
it; besides, I am so difficult to please, you will have no easy time of
it in unrolling and rolling up again all those silks you have brought.
No ceremony; help yourself."

"What; not pledge me?" she said, with an arch smile. "Pour me out a
glass if you please, and hand the biscuits."

The blood rushed to my face, as I stammered out my excuse that I feared
to take such a liberty.

"You will very likely have to come here pretty often, so pray make
yourself quite at home. Here, I wish you every success in your business.
Now, sir, drink, to me!" she said, raising the glass to her lips.

I did the same, wishing her ladyship every future happiness.

She pressed me to take a second glass, and then I proceeded to open out
the rolls of silk for her inspection, and at the same time I felt a most
extraordinary glow pervade my whole system, as if the wine had
contained some very potent stimulant.

She seemed quite absorbed in the business of selection. Her pretty hands
every now and then seemed to touch me quite inadvertently; yet there was
quite a magnetic influence in them--such a thrill would shoot through my
frame at the slightest contact.

Very few minutes had elapsed ere she appeared to become suddenly very
faint, and sank back on the ottoman.

"Oh, sprinkle my temple with water, Mr. Saul. Don't call for assistance;
it will soon pass off,"--as she saw me about to ring the bell. "Oh! oh!
this dreadful cramp in my leg; it always comes when I feel faint. Do rub
the right calf; chafe it as hard as you can," she cried out, in apparent
great pain.

I sank on my knees by the side of the ottoman, and taking up her tiny
right foot (I had never seen one so small before), chafed the calf as
hard as I could.

I cannot describe how I felt at that moment, as my hands played over the
smooth pink silk stocking which encased that delicate, but
beautifully-moulded leg.

Looking up in her face, her head had sunk back on a cushion; the eyes
were closed, but quite an expression of pain pervaded the lovely
features.

She was insensible; what a chance! How could I resist pushing aside the
slight coverings which so lightly veiled the seat of love. Heavens! she
had no drawers on!

My hand stole up her lovely thigh, and was about to touch the spot
itself, which I could see nestled in a little grove of auburn curls,
between her closely-compressed thighs, when she seemed to awake with a
sigh and a start.

"My God, what have you seen, Mr. Saul?" she said, drawing herself up and
wrapping the dressing-gown closely round her.

My blood was in a boil, as I threw myself upon her, saying, in a deep
husky kind of whisper, "My lovely lady, you have indeed permitted me to
see too much of your charms to resist their ravishing influence. I must,
I will have you, if I die for it!"

One of my legs was between hers, and I struggled to open them still
more. She seemed to resist me with all her strength; we panted; we
struggled; slowly but surely my superior strength seemed to prevail, the
fiery head of my prick almost touched the lips of that delicious quim. I
pressed my mouth to those pouting cherry lips of hers; I inhaled and
sucked in luscious draughts of her fragrant breath.

Ah, ha, ha, she yields; her rigid limbs relax. I gain ground; the head
of my prick enters between the throbbing lips of that heavenly cunt. I
shove; I push on; it is in to the roots. Ye gods! what a paradise to
enter; it seems like taking heaven by storm. The crisis seizes me, and a
perfect torrent of my long-pent-up sperm floods the very bottom of her
womb, and we both almost faint from excess of pleasure, and as I lay
supine upon her I had the ineffable enjoyment of feeling the soft
hugging pressure of those ivory arms, which now clasped me to her bosom,
whilst her lips repaid my previous attention by a profusion of loving,
billing kisses.

A chuckling laugh behind me recalled me to my senses, and turning round
to see what it could be, to my horror I beheld the marquis himself
standing frigging a very nice fine prick of his own, and evidently
enjoying the sight of our conjunction.

"There's a lewd little bitch for you!" he exclaimed. "To think of my
sister, the aristocratic Lady Diana, having a linendraper's assistant;
but I'll punish you. You shall commit incest with me, your brother, and
you, Mister Counter-jumper, shall look on."

His sudden appearance had in a moment reduced my cock to its normal
state of limpness, and I withdrew quite abashed from the delicious cunt
I had spent in.

"Slap my arse; bugger me; shove your prick into me as I fuck her, and
you shall be well paid!" he almost shouted, throwing himself on his
sister, and beginning to fuck fast and furiously.

"My pet, my love, my own Diana, no one shall ever marry you, you
darling, although I must first be excited by seeing some beautiful boy
have you. And you, sir, make haste to help me behind; it's the only way
I can really enjoy my sister!"

Prick was ready again in less time than I can write it; the sight of a
brother fucking his sister so excited me that I began to slap his bottom
with my open palm as hard as I could with one hand, whilst the other was
busy feeling his balls and handling the shaft of his fine stiff penis as
it worked in and out of that lovely cunt.

"Fuck me! bugger me! or I can't spend!" he exclaimed, so nothing loth, I
lubricated his fine hairy and wrinkled arsehole with spittle, and
bringing the head of my cock to the tight-looking orifice I speedily
effected an entrance.

What a fuck that was! He was evidently rather slow, although awfully
excited, and both his sister and myself having just emitted a profusion
of our essence of life, we were not so quick in reaching the spending
point.

With both hands I frigged him, and tickled her clitoris, as he fucked
away, whilst my prick was as lively as possible in his posterior
aperture.

At last we came, and all three almost at the same moment; our bodies
fairly quivering again and again as the electric thrills shot through
our excited frames.

At last it was over, and both of them overwhelmed me with caresses till
it was absolutely necessary for me to take my departure, when Lady Diana
hastily selected several pieces of silk, whilst the marquis pressed a
ten-pound note into my hand, and assured me I would very often have a
chance of obliging both himself and sister again.

For a period of two years I continued to be their favourite, till, Lady
Diana's health failing, the marquis took her to Naples.

It appeared, in explanation of this incident, that this brother and
sister had always loved each other to excess since the age of puberty,
and nothing would induce either of them to marry. Although the marquis
at last became so blasé that he required the stimulating sight of seeing
his sister fucked by a boy before he could enjoy her himself, she loved
him as much as ever, and allowed herself to be used as a lure to seduce
young fellows like myself, in order to pander to his depraved tastes.

I never saw the Marquis of Churton or his beautiful sister again, but a
month or two afterwards I had to wait upon a rich city gentleman, the
principal of a large financial house, who I shall call Mr. Ferdinand, a
rather handsome but exceedingly blasé gentleman, between thirty-five
and forty years of age.

Not to be too tedious with my story, I may say that I soon found out
that his letch was to be frigged by a young fellow like myself, and many
handsome presents did I receive from my generous patron for that and an
occasional suck which I gave his prick sometimes by way of an extra
treat.

Once he induced me to stop out all night, and the next day Mr. Gooser
gave me my dismissal. It was done very kindly, but he assured me that
the rules of Messrs. Cygnet and Ego's house could not be infringed by
himself or any of the highest employés.

Mr. Ferdinand seemed rather pleased than otherwise at my misfortune, and
promised to introduce me to a secret club, the members of which he
assured me would only be too glad of my services at their pederastic
seances, and my fortune would be at once assured.

This club was in a street out of Portland Place, and if you had looked
in the London Directory you would simply have found it as the residence
of a Mr. Inslip--a rather suggestive name, you will think, considering
the practices of the members of his club.

I afterwards found that no gentleman was admitted to the freedom of this
establishment unless he first paid an admission fee of one hundred
guineas, besides a handsome annual subscription and liberal payments for
refreshments and the procuration of boys, soldiers or youths like
myself.

My financial friend duly introduced me to Mr. Inslip, who was soon very
favourably impressed by my feminine appearance and well-furnished
implements of love.

The very same evening there was to be a club meeting, at least a dozen
gentlemen being expected to be present, so after having subscribed my
name to a very fearful oath of secrecy, I took my leave of the
proprietor with a promise to look in and be introduced to his patrons
about 10 p. m.

Just as he was seeing me to the door there was a loud knock, and he
opened it to a handsome, tall young fellow, with light auburn hair and
deep blue eyes.

"The very man I want," said Mr. Inslip. "Let me introduce you to a new
friend. Mr. Saul, Mr. Fred Jones. Now Fred, you know we have a soirée
to-night. Will you take care of Mr. Saul till then, and bring him back
with you? You can let him into our ways a bit by that time, and then he
will be quite _au fait_."

"All right, guv'nor," responded Fred. "I like the look of him. So come
along, my dear, and have a chop and cigars at my rooms," he said,
turning to me.

Mr. Jones had been a soldier in the Foot Guards, and, bought out by Mr.
Inslip as soon as the latter found what a useful youth he was, in great
favour with the members of his club.

"We all do it," said Fred to me, as we sat smoking and sipping brandy
and water after the chops he had invited me to partake of in his rooms.
"It's the commonest thing possible in the Army. As soon as (or before)
I had learned the goose-step, I had learned to be goosed, and enjoyed
it, my dear; don't you, Jack?" he said, slapping my thigh and passing
his hand over my most interesting member. "Now I'll tell you all about
it. We'll keep ourselves fresh for to-night; but another day I mean to
both fuck you and have you fuck me. Is that a bargain, my dear?"

Having assured him that I was perfectly agreable to be his wife or
husband, whichever he preferred, at any time, he continued:--

"I was saying how common sodomy is in the Army. Our old major was the
first to introduce me to it. He made me drunk, and next morning I found
myself in his bed with him. Money was everything with me then. It
always has been. Why, I used to be office lad to a solicitor at
Liverpool, where I forged his cheque for a hundred pounds and ran away
to London, had a damned spree for a week, lost or spent it all, then
enlisted. It was the safest thing to do; the military rig-out so changes
the appearance of a fellow.

"Well, I was speaking about our old major. Two or three quid squared me
at once, and I let him get into my arse again, as no doubt he had done
whilst I was drunk. That was the first time I really felt what it was
like, and enjoyed it. My stars! how the old buck afterwards sucked my
prick and frigged me till I hadn't a drop of spend left in me.

"In a very short time I got used to his ways, and used to abuse him,
telling him what a beast he was, etc., which used to delight him, and
he would give me an extra sov. for it.

"I have had lots of women, but do not care for them, for they do not
make half so much of us as gentlemen do, although of course they always
pay us. You can easily imagine it is not so agreable to spend
half-an-hour with a housemaid, when one has been caressed all night by a
nobleman.

"This is the experience of all the men of my regiment, and I know it is
the same in the First, The Blues, and every regiment of Foot Guards.

"When a young fellow joins, someone of us breaks him in and teaches him
the trick; but there is very little need of that, for it seems to come
naturally to almost every young man, so few have escaped the
demoralization of schools or crowded homes. We then have no difficulty
in passing him onto some gentleman, who always, pays us liberally for
getting a fresh young thing for him.

"Although of course we all do it for money, we also do it because we
really like it, and if gentlemen gave us no money, I think we should do
it all the same.

"Many of us were married; but that makes no difference. All we have to
do is not to let the gentlemen know it, because married men are not in
request.

"So far as I can see all the best gentlemen in London like running after
soldiers, and I have letters from some of the very highest in the land.
One gentleman, a nobleman, had me once in his own house, in the room
next to his wife's boudoir. I heard her laughing, and talking, or
playing on the piano, whilst her husband was on his knees before me,
sucking my prick.

"We both laughed about it afterwards, especially when I asked him if he
thought her ladyship would not like a dose from the same bottle?

"On one occasion five of us went with one gentlemen and acted with him
or with one another for him to see, every kind of buggery, frigging and
gamahuching. It was a luscious scene, just such as you will see
to-night, my dear," he said, squeezing my stiff prick outside my
trousers. "But wait till then; don't let my talk make you randy," he
continued.

"That gentlemen was a clergyman, and one of the most liberal friends I
ever had."

"Young fellows are quite as much after us as older men. I have often
been fucked by young gentlemen of sixteen or seventeen, and at Windsor
lots of the Eton boys come after us.

"I know two men in The Blues who are regularly kept by gentlemen, and
one has an allowance of two hundred a year for allowing himself to be
sucked.

"There are lots of houses in London for it. I will give you a list some
day, where only soldiers are received, and where gentlemen can sleep
with them. The best known is now closed. It was the tobacconist's shop
next door to Albany Street Barraks, Regent's Park, and was kept by a
Mrs. Truman. The old lady would receive orders from gentlemen, and then
let us know. That is all over now, but there are still six houses in
London that I know of. Inslip's Club, however, pays me best, so I am
very little known elsewhere at present."

He never allowed the conversation to flag all the evening, and rattled
on in the same style till nearly ten o'clock; and I think by the time we
put on our hats to go to the club he had fairly told me all he knew, and
considerably opened my eyes as to how the sin of Sodom was regularly
practised in the Modern Babylon.

Mr. Inslip always opened the door himself, and at once ushered us into a
small dressing-room, where we left our hats and other impedimenta, and
under Fred's directions I assumed a charming female costume. He acted
as lady's maid, fitted my bust with a pair of false bubbies, frizzed my
hair with curling irons, and fixed me up by adding a profusion of false
plaits behind.

Then he also dressed himself as a girl, and when we both looked in the
glass preparatory to going to join the company, we appeared so pretty
and feminine that I was quite in love with him, and clasped him to my
breast as I imprinted hot burning kisses on his lips, whilst my hands
groped under his clothes, and up his drawers, till I had hold of a
splendid stiff prick. His eyes fairly shot fire as he returned my ardent
kisses for a moment or two, and then suddenly wrenched himself away,
with the observation that we must not make fools of ourselves. We could
have plenty of that sort of thing some other time.

He had evidently heard Inslip's footstep, for that worthy appeared
almost in a moment to ask how much longer we should be. He complimented
us upon being two such pretty girls, and then said, "For this evening,
Fred, your name is Isabel, and yours, Mr. Saul, is to be Eveline."

"Gentlemen", he said, as he ushered us into a fine large drawing-room,
"these are the Misses Isabel end Eveline I had promised should be here
to meet you this evening."

All rose as we entered; there were ten gentlemen and eight ladies
waiting to receive us. It was a splendid apartment fitted up with
mirrors all over the walls, whilst the windows were firmly closed and
shuttered, besides the thick curtains which were drawn across them. Here
and there were recesses filled by luxurious couches, before each of
which stood a small table covered with the most exhilarating
refreshments.

Two elderly gentlemen advanced and conducted us to seats.

Presently some one sat down to a piano and struck up a quadrille, and in
a few moments we were going through the fascinating evolutions of a
dance.

Our partners were particularly attentive to us, mine more especially
so--in fact I can only speak for myself. He plied me with refreshments
after every dance, and I could see was immensely taken with me. Now and
then he would pinch my bottom, and after a little while slyly got one
hand up my clothes and groped till he found my prick. His touch added
fuel to the flames of lust by which I was already consumed; a very few
touches sufficed to make me spend all over his hand, which I perceived
gave him great pleasure.

About two o'clock in the morning the lights were suddenly turned out,
and we were all in the dark.

"Now, love, I must have you," he whispered. "Every one has got a
partner; and after I have fucked your delicious bottom, we separate and
find another partner in the dark, so there can be no favouritism or
neglect of any member."

He made me lean over the couch on my face, and lifting up my skirts
behind he knelt down and kissed my bottom, buggering me with his tongue
till the hole was well moistened; then getting up, I felt a fine prick
brought up to the charge. It hurt me a little; but he was soon in, then
passing his hands round my buttocks he frigged me most deliciously as he
worked furiously in my bum.

How I thrust out my arse to meet every lunge! But it did not last long;
we were both too hot, and came almost directly. It was a delightful
bottom-fuck; but the rules precluded us from having a second, and we
parted with a loving kiss, and went in search of other partners.

Before time was called about 6 a. m., I had had six different gentlemen,
besides one of those dressed up as a girl. We sucked; we frigged and
gamahuched, and generally finished off by the orthodox buggery in a
tight arsehole.

I became a regular frequenter of Inslip's soirées, as I always got a
fiver for the night, besides plenty of fun and refreshment; but
contented myself with two nights a week, for fear of getting used up too
soon, by which self-denial Eveline became a universal favourite.

The extent to which pederasty is carried on in London between gentlemen
and young fellows is little dreamed of by the outside public. You
remember the Boulton and Park case? Well; I was present at the ball
given at Haxell's Hotel in the Strand. No doubt the proprietor was quite
innocent of any idea of what our fun really was; but there were two or
three dressing-rooms into which the company could retire at pleasure.

Boulton was superbly got up as a beautiful lady, and I observed Lord
Arthur was very spooney upon her.

During the evening I noticed them slip away together, and made up my
mind to try and get a peep at their little game, so followed them as
quietly as possible, and saw them pass down a corridor to another
apartment, not one of the dressing-rooms which I knew had been provided
for the use of the party, but one which I suppose his lordship had
secured for his own personal use.

I was close enough behind them to hear the key turned in the lock.
Foiled thus for a moment, I turned the handle of the next door, which
admitted me to an unoccupied room, and to my great delight a beam of
bright light streamed from the keyhole of a door of communication
between that and the one my birds had taken refuge in.

Quietly kneeling down I put my eye to the hole, and found I had a famous
view of all that was going on in the next room. It put me in mind of the
scene between two youths which Fanny Hill relates to have seen through a
peephole at a roadside inn. I could both see and hear everything that
was passing.

Lord Arthur and Boulton, whom he addressed as Laura, were standing
before a large mirror. He had his arm round her waist, and every now and
then drew Laura's lips to his for a long, luscious kiss. His inamorata
was not idle, for I could see her unbuttoning his trousers, and soon
she let out a beautiful specimen of the _arbor vitæ_, at least nine
inches long and very thick. It was in glorious condition, with a great,
glowing red head.

Laura at once knelt down and kissed this jewel of love, and would I
believe have sucked him to a spend; but Lord Arthur was too impatient,
as he raised his companion from her stooping posture, and passing his
hands under Laura's clothes, as she gave a very pretty scream and
pretended to be shocked at this rudeness, he turned everything up and
tossed her on the bed.

As yet there was nothing to see but a beautiful pair of legs, lovely
knickerbocker drawers, prettily trimmed with the finest lace, also pink
silk stockings and the most fascinating little shoes with silver
buckles. His lordship quickly opened Laura's thighs, and, putting his
hand into her drawers, soon brought to light as manly a weapon as any
lady could desire to see, and very different from the crinkum-crankum
one usually expects to find when one throws up a lady's petticoats and
proceeds to take liberties with her; but his lordship's love was only a
man in woman's clothes, as everyone now knows it was Boulton's practice
to make himself up as a lovely girl. There seems such a peculiar
fascination to gentlemen in the idea of having a beautiful creature,
such as an ordinary observer would take for a beautiful lady, to dance
and flirt with, knowing all the while that his inamorata is a youth in
disguise.

"What's this beautiful plaything, Laura darling? Are you an
hermaphrodite, my love? Oh, I must kiss it; it's such a treasure! Will
it spend like a man's love?"

I heard Lord Arthur say all this as he fondled and caressed Boulton's
prick, passing his hand up and down the ivory-white shaft and kissing
the dark, ruby-coloured head every time it was uncovered.

How excited I became at the sight you may be sure. I also longed to
caress and enjoy both the fine pegos I had seen; but although my own
prick was stiff almost to bursting, I determined not to frig myself, as
I was sure of finding a nice partner when I returned to the ball-room.
Still, I would rather have had Boulton than anyone. His make-up was so
sweetly pretty that I longed to have him and him have me.

But to go on. I could see that the assumed Laura was greatly agitated.
Her whole frame shook, whilst one of his lordship's hands seemed to be
under Laura's bottom, and no doubt was postillioning her bottom-hole;
and presently, seeing how agitated he had made her, he took that
splendid prick fairly into his mouth and sucked away with all the ardour
of a male gamahucher; his eyes almost emitted sparks as the crisis
seemed to come, and he must have swallowed every drop of the creamy
emission he had worked so hard to obtain.

His other hand frigged the shaft of Boulton's prick rapidly as he sucked
its delicious head.

After a minute or two he wiped his mouth, and turned Laura round so as
to present her bottom over the edge of the bed, then threw up all the
skirts over her back, and opening the drawers behind he kissed each
cheek of the lovely white bum, and tickled the little hole with his
tongue, but he was too impatient to waste much time in kissing, so at
once presented his prick to Boulton's fundament, as he held the two
cheeks of his pretty arse open with his hands.

Although such a fine cock, it did not seem to have a very difficult task
to get in, and he was so excited that he appeared to come at once; but
keeping his place, he soon commenced a proper bottom fuck, which both of
them gave signs of enjoying intensely, for I could fairly hear his belly
flop against Boulton's buttocks at every home push, whilst each of them
called the other by the most endearing terms, such as:

"Oh, Laura, Laura, what a darling you are! Tell me, love, that you love
me! tell me it's a nice fuck!"

And then the other would exclaim:

"Push; push; fuck me; ram your darling prick in as fast as it will go!
oh! oh! oh! quicker, quicker; do come now, dearest Arthur; my love, my
pet! oh! oh!! oh!!!"

After seeing so much I slipped away from the keyhole, and went back to
the company in the dancing room.

Park was there as a lady, dancing with a gentleman from the city, a very
handsome Greek merchant, but I did not care for either of them, but sat
for a while on a sofa by myself, watching the dancers and taking notice
of all the little freedoms they so constantly exchanged with each other.

Presently Lord Arthur and Laura returned to the room and came and sat
down by me, his lordship, to whom Mr. Inslip had previously introduced
me, at once saying: "Allow me to introduce you two dears to one another
Miss Laura, Miss Eveline. I must go away for a minute, and will be back
directly."

Boulton seemed to take to me at once, and after a little ordinary
conversation, whispered to me as he gave me a card:

"Come and see us in our rooms to-morrow, as we are. I know I shall love
you; but there is no chance for it here. We must amuse our customers
to-night."

This I agreed to, and soon after the lights were turned out and a
general lark in the dark took place. I do not for a moment believe there
was one real female in the room, for I groped ever so many of them, and
always found a nice little cock under their petticoats, most of them
quite slimy with spendings, they had been frigged so often.

At last it was over, but just as Mr. Inslip was going to hand me to his
brougham, Boulton asked him to let me go home with them, and at once
drove me off with Park to their rooms near Eaton Square.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME




THE SINS OF THE CITIES OF THE PLAIN


_Only 250 copies printed._




THE SINS

OF THE

CITIES OF THE PLAIN

OR THE

_RECOLLECTIONS OF A MARY-ANN_

WITH SHORT ESSAYS ON

SODOMY AND TRIBADISM

IN TWO VOLUMES

VOLUME II.

LONDON

PRIVATELY PRINTED

1881




JACK SAUL'S RECOLLECTIONS

(_continued_).

SOME FROLICS WITH BOULTON AND PARK


As soon as we got to Boulton's place, he gave me a drop of his
invigorating cordial, a lovely liqueur which seemed to warm my blood to
the tips of my fingers; then we went to bed, and slept till about
twelve o'clock, had breakfast, all dressed as ladies (I believe the
people of the house thought that we were gay ladies).

Boulton assured me they hadn't a rag of male clothing in the place, all
their manly attire being at some other place.

"I love to look like a girl, and to be thought one. I had such a lark
the other day with a beautiful milliner at Richmond," he said, sipping
his chocolate. "You must know I was stopping at the Star and Garter
Hotel, and fancied a new dress; or, rather, I had seen this lovely
milliner in her shop--she was the principal--so I went in, gave my
order, requesting her to call on the Hon. Miss Murray at the hotel to
try it on in two days' time.

"She was a lovely creature, nearly six feet high, but beautifully
proportioned, with dark auburn hair, deep blue eyes, and such a lovely
white skin, whilst her mouth was almost always on the smile, showing a
lovely set of pearly teeth with which I was so much in love that I
wanted to make her take my cock between her lips; besides, she was just
slightly freckled, which is always a great charm in my idea.

"Miss Bruce, that was her name, called on me about twelve o'clock, as I
was at breakfast, so I pressed her to take a cup of chocolate, and as I
had expected her, she did not see the cordial at the bottom of the cup
before I poured it out for her.

"Having elicited that she was not particularly busy, we sat chatting for
some time about fashion and trimmings, etc., for I am as well up in all
that as any lady in England.

"When I could see by the sparkle of her eyes that the cordial had
considerably warmed her blood, I asked her to step into the bedroom to
try on the dress.

"She was going to fit it on at once, and was about to remove my morning
costume, when I exclaimed: 'Oh, not for a minute or two. I feel rather
faint, my dear Miss Bruce. I must sit still a little. Do you mind giving
me a drop of that cordial?' as I indicated a little liqueur case on the
table. 'It will put me right at once. I often come over like that. Thank
you. Now pray take a little yourself. It will do you good, and is so
nice.'

"She followed my example, and seemed evidently to like the flavour of
it.

"'Sit down, dear, by my side. There is no hurry about that troublesome
costume.'

"Then as she sat down I gave her such a luscious kiss on her mouth,
saying: 'You look so pretty; do excuse me, if you won't kiss me in
return. I do so love to be kissed by nice people; not gentlemen, of
course, but I am so fond of ladies if they will let me love them. Do
kiss me, darling!' and I drew her face again towards mine and looked
into those lovely deep blue eyes.

"She threw her arms round my neck as she blushed up to her temples, and
said in a soft voice: 'How can I help it? You are so loving!'

"Then our lips joined in such a long-drawn kiss that I quite felt her
heave with emotion. 'Do I excite you, darling, by such kissing?' I
asked, and taking advantage of her confusion, I soon had one hand under
her dress, and slipped it up to the seat of love. She scarcely resisted
my advances at all.

"'You love, I must kiss it. For God's sake let me. I am so in love with
you!' I said, slipping down on my knees in front of her, and before she
could help herself my head was under her clothes and my tongue trying to
tickle her clitoris, as my hands forced her yielding thighs apart. It
was too much for her. The cordial had so warmed her blood she could
hardly tell what she wanted; besides, I was a lady, and not a man, so
there could be no harm in that, as she afterwards told me.

"How I did gamahuche her as she fell back on the sofa and let me have my
way. She wriggled, heaved and sighed.

"I could hear her gasp out: 'You darling; you love! How nice; how
delicious!'

"Then her spendings came in a thick creamy emission, and I sucked it all
up, and delighted her so by the tittillations of my tongue that she soon
came again.

"After a little I got up and sat by her side.

"'And you, love, won't you allow me to kiss and return you the exquisite
pleasure you have just afforded me?' she asked, as she kissed me
excitedly.

"I pretended to resist her attempts to get at my cunney, and at last
blushingly told her that I was one of those unfortunate beings (which
perhaps she had heard of) who had a malformation, something like the
male instrument--in fact, it was capable of stiffening, and always did
so under excitement, exactly as a man's would do.

"'But, darling,' I added, 'it is quite harmless, and can do no mischief
like the real male affair. Now you, I know, will be too disgusted to
want to kiss me, although I am dying for you to afford me that
pleasure.'

"This avowal seemed to excite her still more, and she assured me that
she had often heard of hermaphrodites, and that they could have women as
well as a man.

"'And now, darling, I am more anxious than ever to see and caress the
jewel you must have. I own I have often wanted to feel what a man is
like, and you can oblige me without any risk if you will. Will you, my
darling?'

"She had got to the object of her desires by the time she ceased
speaking, and at once commenced to kiss and caress it; the idea that
perhaps I might be a real man never seemed to occur to her mind.

"'Oh, do have me, Miss Murray. I should so like you to ravish me; my
blood is on fire; I'm not in my right senses; the sight of such a
darling fills me with such a longing that I can't restrain myself. If
you don't do it for me, you shall never love my little fanny again!'

"She had it in her mouth directly and sucked it so lusciously that I
felt I should spend in her mouth if I did not have her properly at once,
so I jumped up and asked her to lie on her back on the sofa and open her
legs well.

"She did so at once, and turning up both our dresses we were soon belly
to belly; her hand kept hold of my prick and directed it to the mouth of
her cunt herself.

"By heavens! she was a virgin, and so tight! but I clasped her round the
waist, and pushed furiously; so much so that she fairly screamed with
the pain and tried to shove me away; but the crisis came, I shot a warm
flood of sperm into her tight sheath, which, besides easing it a little,
so excited the dear girl that she heaved up her bottom to meet me, and
as I happened to push hard at the same moment, John Thomas fairly
crashed through all the defences of her unbroken hymen, leaving nothing
but a bloody wreck behind, as he went in up to the hilt.

"She did not scream, but giving one long, deep-drawn sigh, fairly
swooned away under me.

"I did not withdraw, but lay as lightly as possible on her, making my
prick throb in the tight-fitting sheath which imprisoned it so
deliciously. I could feel the folds of her cunt contract on my shaft of
love with a most delightful spasmodic twitching, such as I had never
enjoyed before, and in about five minutes she opened her eyes and, with
a smile, whispered: 'Oh, dearest, what a dream! I dreamt I was smashed
to atoms; then my soul soared away to heaven, and I have been in
Paradise, tasting such exquisite sweets, such thrills of love, and now I
wake up to find it is you, darling, and that dear thing of yours that
gives me such pleasure. How I feel it deliciously filling every part of
my womb! But you are not a man, are you, darling? you can't do me any
harm, can you? Do tell me that, love, and I shall be happy; otherwise I
should tear myself from your arms and burst into tears!'

"How beautiful she looked! such a lovely flush of excitement on her
pretty face! how could I undeceive her, so I glued my lips to hers, as I
murmured: 'No, darling; I'm not a man. I can't hurt my love!'

"'Then, darling, give me all the pleasure you are capable of with it,'
she said, smiling and heaving up her buttocks at the same time as a
challenge for me to go on.

"My God! what a fuck we had! She kept me in position till I had come
four times. You would think my prick would have wrinkled up from
exhaustion, instead of which I was so unnaturally excited that it
swelled bigger than ever, and, although I did not spend again, we kept
on ding-dong till I had fairly used her up and she had to beg I would
let her go, as she had no more strength.

"How many times I made her spend it would be impossible to say.

"You won't be surprised to hear that that dress did not easily fit. She
came so many times to try it on, and fucked me so dry, that at last I
had fairly to run away from Richmond, and she will be very lucky if she
does not get a big belly."

"Have you had many adventures of that kind?" I asked.

"Yes; plenty of them. I can tell you a lot of amusing adventures; but
now, Eveline, Selina and I want a bit of fun with you, all alone by
ourselves. It will be real love; not the mercenary, paid love we give
our customers. I have got quite fond of you, and Selina won't be
jealous. She will assist to make me happy; won't you, my darling?"

He rose from the breakfast-table, and opening the piano, ran his fingers
over the keys; then motioning me to come to him, gave me a luscious
kiss. "You darling Eveline, I'm sure your prick stands," he said,
groping under my dress and finding it was as he said. "Now I will play
you a nice piece, only I have a fancy to have you in me, and you must
both fuck and frig me as I play to you," he said, as he made me sit on
the music-stool, then raised my dress, and turning his bottom to me,
lifted his own clothes and gradually sat down in my lap; as my stiff
prick went up his bottom, my hands went round his waist, and I clasped
that glorious cock of his, and he began to play and sing "Don't you
remember sweet Alice, Ben Bolt?" from a parody in the _Pearl Magazine_,
which he had set to music.

It had such an exciting effect on me that I shot my sperm at once, and I
felt him spend all over my hands at the same time.

"Now, wasn't that nice, dear Eveline? Do you love your Laura a little
bit?" he said, stopping and twisting his head round to give me a long
sucking kiss on my mouth.

We kept our places, and he played several more pieces before we came
again; then we adjourned to the bedroom, and he rang for the breakfast
things to be cleared away.

The door was at once bolted, and then Laura asked me if I had ever been
birched.

"Oh, yes," I replied; "and it's delicious when properly applied."

"Well then, Selina has not had any fun yet, and I don't think you will
be any too ready to oblige her, so we intend to tie you up to the
bedstead and see how soon the twigs will reinvigorate you, my darling.
You know you were naughty and rude to me while I sat on your lap just
now, so you must be punished for it at once."

It was useless for me to remonstrate against being tied up, as they were
too strong for me, and I was soon secured by both wrists to the foot of
the bed; then my skirts were pinned up and my drawers opened and let
down to my knees.

"Ha, we have her now, the rude little slut!" exclaimed Laura. "Let me
just pick out a proper little swishtail, and I'll take all that out of
her naughty, impudent bum!"

I had never had a very severe birching, and rather dreaded they were
going to be too hard on me. My poor prick had fairly shrunk up into his
skin.

"Just look at that shrivelled-up thing, Selina. Did you ever see such a
useless looking bit in your life? Stand clear and let me apply the
reviver!"

Laura had got a long, thin bunch of birch, consisting of only three or
four twigs, elegantly tied up with ribbons. Swish!--I heard it cut
through the air, and if I had not been tied as I was I should fairly
have jumped, such a stinging cut did I get.

"Ah! oh!! oh!!! Good God! not so hard, or you'll draw the blood!" I
almost screamed out, as I winced under the pain.

"Ha! that was a beautifully practical illustration of how the birch
should be applied. But perhaps you will like that better--and that--and
that----?"

Three stinging cuts followed in rapid succession, and almost took my
breath away.

It was no use calling out, so I fairly bit my lips to repress any cry
of pain. It was not so much the weight of the blows but their smart,
stinging severity. It soon made my bum all of a glow, and I began to
experience a decided feeling of pleasure, my prick standing as hard as
possible once more.

"Hold; hold; don't draw the blood, Laura dear!" cried Selina. "You've
raised him finely. Now let me enjoy my turn; I long for him in my bottom
at once. I can't wait while you play with him any longer; but you can
touch him up when he is in me, to keep him to his work."

She was untying my wrists as she said this, and in less time than it
takes to tell I was into her bottom and Laura's prick was in mine.

Never shall I forget the excess of lubricity of this triune fuck; we
seemed all so excited; we fairly spent again and again, till nature was
so exhausted that we lay in a confused heap on the bed, as our pricks
soaked in each other's well-lubricated bumholes.

At last we thought we had had enough for one day and a night, so after
taking a most loving farewell and promising to visit them often, I had a
cab called and drove to my lodgings, where I can assure you I stopped
two days to thoroughly rest and recruit my strength before venturing
upon any further use of either bottom or prick.

Soon after this introduction to Boulton and Park, I had a funny
adventure in the Temple. A note came from a barrister--in fact, a
leading Q.C.--to say that Mr. Inslip had mentioned my name to him as
likely to oblige him in a certain way, and would I be so good as to give
him a call at his chambers at 4.30 p.m. next day.

Of course I went, and was shown into the private room of Mr. Horner, who
I found had a lady with him.

He at once dismissed his clerk, with the observation "that he should not
want him again to-day," and then, as soon as the door was closed,
turning to me, said:--

"Mr. Saul, I am much obliged that you answered my note so promptly. It
is not that I require your services myself, but this lady here wants a
good fucking."

"Awful! the man's mad! Pray let me out!" almost screamed the lady in
affright, as she made a rush to the door.

"Stop her! Don't be a fool, woman!" shouted Mr. Horner. "Didn't you come
here to be fucked?--now just answer that question--yes or no--as we say
in court. Tell Mr. Saul the truth."

The lady covered her blushing face with her handkerchief, and began to
sob.

"Well I never; there's no understanding women at all. No wonder I never
got married," exclaimed the Q.C. "Would you believe it? She came here to
be fucked; I tell you the plain truth. I wanted a nice housekeeper, a
free-and-easy one, that would humour me in anything I might fancy, and
Miss Wilson here answered my advertisement. We were some time beating
about the bush, till at last I plainly told her she would have to stand
fucking, and must come to my chambers one afternoon on trial. She should
have fifty pounds if I did not engage her, and two hundred a-year as
lady-housekeeper if she pleased me. My God, I sent for you to fuck her.
I didn't mean to do it myself; the fact is I require a very peculiar
kind of excitement before I can get a cockstand. Now, Miss Wilson, you
understand this is a nice young fellow, far nicer than myself, and I'm
damn'd if I don't see him fuck you! We'll have a glass of fizz first,
and then to business."

We had the champagne, then opening a door into another room I saw a bed.
He gave me a sign, and I helped him to strip the frightened young lady.

She was powerless in our hands, and I noticed he took quite a
particular pleasure in humiliating her and acting as rudely as possible
in every way he could think of.

When she was stripped I commenced to throw off all my clothes, while he
was amusing himself, kissing and tickling her cunt and clitoris till the
poor young lady was almost dead with shame, besides being so excited
that she could hardly contain herself.

"Now jump up," he exclaimed, "and don't spare the randy bitch. She's
spent all over my fingers!"

Miss Wilson was too much overcome to attempt any resistance to my
attack. She was not a virgin, so I soon got into possession of all she
had and began to fire her blood still more by a good rapid fuck, Mr.
Horner all the while slapping my arse with his heavy hand, as he laughed
and almost screamed with delight.

This excited me immensely, so that you may be sure I did not spare our
victim, especially as she was so beside herself with real erotic emotion
that she heaved, wriggled, and squirmed about beneath me, and when the
spending crisis came she was so carried away by her lubricity that her
arms held me almost like a vice, and she actually made her teeth meet in
the fleshy part of my shoulder.

Mr. Horner now joined in by putting one finger up my bottom, and then in
a minute or two more I felt his prick take the place of his digit.

Mine was a most delightful position. I never enjoyed anything more than
I did being sandwiched between him and Miss Wilson. Not one of the three
seemed anxious to bring such a delightful conjunction to a close, and I
am sure Mr. H. was all half-an-hour fucking my bottom, whilst I
continued to make Miss W. respond in the most amorous manner possible to
the motions of my excited pego.

She so far forgot herself as to say soft endearing things, and would
every now and then ejaculate:--

"Ah! oh! how delicious! You make me come again; I can't help myself. I'm
in heaven. Push, push now, there's a darling!"

Whilst the barrister was so carried away that he fairly screamed with
delight.

I was handsomely rewarded for my services, and he took Miss Wilson for
his housekeeper, and I afterwards often went through the same
performance with them at his residence in Palace Gardens, Kensington.

The next adventure I can think of was at a garden party given in honour
of the Prince of Wales; I will not say exactly where, but it was in the
grounds of a noble mansion on the banks of the Thames, not a hundred
miles from Richmond.

Lord Arthur took me with him, dressed as a midshipman, and I was
presented to his Royal Highness as the Hon. Mr. Somebody, I can't
exactly remember the name now.

After promenading for some time we met an elderly gentleman to whom he
introduced me as a member of Inslip's Club.

"Eveline," whispered Lord Arthur, "this is Lord H----, who has heard of
your attractions; let me introduce and leave you with him."

Lord H---- expressed the great pleasure he had in making my
acquaintance, adding to Lord Arthur, "that he hoped his young friend was
not too shy or mock modest."

Being reassured upon this point, he took me for a walk into some of the
most shady parts of the grounds.

At last we came to a very retired arbour with a seat behind some
rock-work and a small fountain playing in front.

"Just the spot for us," said his lordship. "Let me sit down here and
make a better acquaintance, my dear!"

He was as loving as if I had been a young girl all at once, and then as
I blushed at his observations about my appearance, and the promising
bunch in the fork of my trousers, he proceeded to handle me, and pressed
his lips to mine in a long breath-sucking kiss.

I wished he had been a nice young fellow, but his attentions soon
aroused all my usually excitable feelings--my cock throbbed, and stood
as stiffly as ever under the soft pressures of his hand, as he held it
inside my trousers.

"I must kiss this darling jewel!" he exclaimed. "I love to swallow all
the spendings of a nice young fellow like you, Eveline."

Then going on his knees before me, he put my prick in his mouth and
sucked me most lusciously, whilst with one hand passed under my bottom
he postillioned me in the most delightful manner possible, and when the
crisis came in a few minutes he swallowed every drop with the greatest
possible relish.

His next proceeding was to lower his breeches and get me to bugger him,
which seemed to afford him equally exquisite pleasure, as his old prick
stood as stiffly as possible. And after I had spent in his arsehole, he
made me toss him off for a finish.

When we rejoined the company, one of the retinue of His Royal Highness
begged for an introduction, and after some little conversation, assured
me my fortune would be made if I would only consent to visit Berlin and
Vienna, as he could introduce me to many of the highest personages in
Germany.

Not caring to leave good old England, I politely declined his overtures,
assuring him at the same time that I had not the least objection to be
introduced to any of his eminent countrymen, should they happen to visit
London.

On our return to town in the evening we found Boulton and Park waiting
for us at his lordship's chambers. They wanted us to join in a special
pederastic orgie, to take place the same night at the house of a certain
young Earl, who had two young foreign pages just arrived, the one from
France and the other from Italy, and their introduction into the mystic
circle was to be the chief event of the night's programme.

Lord Arthur had another engagement, which prevented him coming with us,
and so I went with them.

They had a private brougham in waiting, which took us to Grosvenor
Square.

A very sedate and elderly footman ushered us upstairs to a
dressing-room, which formed part of the Earl's own special apartments, a
suite of six or seven rooms, rigorously set apart from the rest of the
house, where none but his confidential servants and pages were ever
allowed to enter.

At the time of our visit the Countess was out of town at Scarborough,
assiduously carrying on an anything but innocent flirtation with a
certain young Marquis; but the Earl, her husband, cared not a fig for
that, so long as he enjoyed himself in his own way.

"His lordship will expect you in the billiard-room in half-an-hour. You
will find your portmanteaus all right. They were placed here directly
they arrived an hour or so ago," remarked the footman as he withdrew.

"Then we must not lose any time, my dear Eveline. You will find I have
brought a charming costume for you," said Boulton.

Notwithstanding sundry loving jokes and liberties we were soon ready to
see the Earl, and as we entered the billiard-room, found he had three
other gentlemen with him, all young fellows like himself, under
twenty-five or thereabouts.

"How are you, my dears? Laura and Selina, how lovable you both look; and
this, I suppose, is the charming Eveline I heard so much of the other
night at Inslip's. These are my regular chums, who call themselves Mr.
Wirein, Mr. Cold Cream, and the Hon. Mr. Comeagain. You will, of course,
find their names and pedigrees in Debrett if you care to look them up.
Now, don't be bashful, and I will also introduce you to my three pages
who are in special attendance on us to-night."

Saying which he opened the door of what looked like a large bookcase,
and there stood three of the prettiest boys I had ever seen, each of
them quite naked with his stiff prick in his hand.

The eldest, apparently, was a fair young French fellow about seventeen;
the second an olive-tinted, but very handsome Italian boy of fourteen;
and the third an exquisitely formed little nigger boy of about
thirteen, with a prick that any man might have been proud of.

How I longed for the little black fellow!

The billiard-room opened into another fine apartment, used as a
smoking-room, but in reality most luxuriously fitted up with most
seductive-looking couches and ottomans, the heavily-curtained windows
being separated by mirrors which extended from floor to ceiling.

His lordship conducted me to one of the sofas, whilst Laura and Selina
took seats between the other three gentlemen.

Refreshments were served by the pages on little tables in front of us;
then, at a sign from their master, they commenced a gambol at leap-frog
all round the room.

This was a most exciting and beautiful sight--to see three such young
Adonises flying over each other's backs, all their pricks as stiff as if
carved out of stone; then what a study of graceful forms the
ever-varying contour of their lovely figures presented to our fascinated
gaze during the evolutions of their game.

In the midst of the game Lady Isabel was announced, and I at once
recognized Mr. Fred Jones, looking as beautiful as ever in his ladylike
get-up.

This made four ladies and four gentlemen, besides the pages, and the
Earl at once, handing me over to Mr. Wirein, sat himself down with Laura
to a couple of pianos at the end of the room, and they struck up what I
understood to be the "Slap-Bum Polka."

"Lay the boys across your laps, ladies, and slap them well!" exclaimed
Mr. Cold Cream; so, catching hold of the little nigger beauty, I threw
him across my knees, just as my partner got me on his lap, with my
clothes raised and his stiff prick inserted between my thighs, one of
his hands passed round under my clothes till he could get at my prick,
and also frig that comfortably, whilst I turned up little Jumbo's bum
and made him wriggle on my lap like a little eel at every smarting
impact of my hand on his ebony posteriors.

The others were doing the same. Isabel was slapping Léon the French
page, whilst Selina had Menotti the Italian, and right well did their
hands bring the crimson flushes to the boys' bottoms as they slapped
them as hard as they possibly could.

Our partners encouraged us by saying, "Bravo! lay on to them well. Make
them spend under the slapping! Look how their pretty little pricks swell
more and more at every blow!" etc., etc.

And so it was.

Then, just as we fancied our little victims really would spend their
virgin essence, our partners shifted their cocks from between our
thighs, and at the same time applying a little cold cream on the outside
of our fundamental entrances, they slipped into our bottoms in the most
delicious manner.

Mr. Wirein had a lovely prick, which just fitted me exactly, and to
judge by the faces of Isabel and Selina they were equally well pleased
with their partners' affairs.

Little Jumbo's eyes were fairly streaming with tears under the pain of
my slaps. I was too excited to feel the least inclined to spare that
ebony bum of his, for I scarcely knew what I was doing. His cock, quite
seven inches long, young as he was, so took my fancy that I quickly
raised him so that he stood on my lap and brought it right opposite to
my longing lips, which instantly took the coal-black head into my mouth.

Did you ever see a nigger's penis when excited? The head of it is the
blackest part of his body, and looks like a bit of black marble when the
skin is drawn back. I wetted one of my fingers--the middle one of the
left hand--and passing that arm round his bottom, kept him steady whilst
at the same time I postillioned his little bottomhole; my right hand
holding the shaft of his lovely prick or playing with his balls whilst
I sucked his delicious jewel of love.

My partner was equally active. His prick swelled and throbbed in my
bottom as I gently rose and fell upon it, whilst the hand that was
frigging me kept well to its duty.

"You darling! you love! Oh, Eveline, I'm coming! Ah--ah--there it is, my
love. Can you feel it shoot into you?" he exclaimed.

My own emission came at the same moment, and thoroughly lubricated his
active hand as he afforded me the most intense pleasure in both parts at
once; and to add to my emotion little Jumbo shot what I believe to have
been his very first spendings into my mouth. My lips closed convulsively
on the head of his pego, and with a long-drawn, continued suck, drained
and swallowed every drop of his virility as it gushed into my longing
mouth.

When I think of that conjunction even now my prick sticks up in a
moment. Never before or since has my fancy been so excited or have I so
enjoyed the very acme of bliss.

The others also enjoyed themselves immensely, and the Earl had Laura on
his lap as he sat on the music-stool before the piano.

Selina now took Laura's place to play to us, and all being stripped
quite naked, we made five very pretty couples. The Earl had Mr. Wirein;
I secured Léon, the handsome French page; Laura the little Jumbo, etc.,
and we again commenced a most lascivious series of evolutions, forming
our hands into arches in turns, under which the others would waltz, the
leading couple forming the next arch, and so on and on round the
apartment, pulling, squeezing, or slapping pricks all round, so as to
keep them well alive and stiff.

When tired of this we retired with our partners to the sofas, and after
refreshing ourselves with wines, jellies, etc., proceeded to have each
other in the most fanciful ways we could imagine.

I made Léon lay over me the reverse way, so that I could take his fine
pego in my mouth and postillion him with my fingers; all of which he was
nothing loth to return with the greatest of ardour, till we both came in
the other's mouth and racked off each other's spunk to the last drop.
Then I made him turn round facing me as I still lay on my back, and so
gradually bring his bottom down on my prick till I got it all in, and
had him ride me a delicious St. George, as we kissed and tipped each
other the velvet with our tongues, till we both spent again--I in his
arse and he on my belly, his seed shooting along all over my breast.

This rather exhausted us for a time, but we lay in each other's arms, my
prick still soaking and throbbing within the tight folds of his anus,
and quite oblivious to all that was passing around us, when
suddenly--whish! whish! whack! whack! came a birch on poor Léon's bum,
and he would have fairly unshipped my affair from its delicious berth,
had I not held him like a vice in my arms.

It was his lordship, the Earl, birch in hand, whilst the Hon. Mr.
Comeagain was shoving into his bottom and frigging his prick for him.

He was called Mr. Comeagain (I afterwards found out) by his friends, as
no amount of fucking ever seemed to take down the pride of his
constantly standing member.

Another couple in similar conjunction were attacking with the birch the
bottom of his lordship's lover, with others behind who passed their
birching compliments from group to group, till young Léon's bum
evidently received the quintessence of birch discipline. Heavens! how it
made him move and dance on my delighted cock, whilst his affair, quite
eight inches long, swelled and rubbed furiously on my belly as I lay
under him.

This lasted a long time. The twigs fairly drew blood again and again,
but added immensely to our enjoyment; whilst the Earl seemed to take the
greatest possible delight in letting many of his strokes sting the
tenderest parts of my inner thighs, and even my prick itself, if it
happened to be exposed so that his rod could touch it up.

We screamed, laughed, and actually shed tears now and then, till at last
it ended in the usual voluptuous emissions, which drove us almost beyond
our reason from the excessive pleasure of the supreme moment.

This is only a trifle of what we went through before daylight put a stop
to the further development of pederastic ideas for that time at least.
All I know is that it took a good week's rest to make me feel fit to
pay my next visit to Inslip's Club.


[Illustration: Decoration]




FURTHER

RECOLLECTIONS AND INCIDENTS


Only lately I have been introduced to two curious members of the
Mary-Ann profession.

The first is known as Young Wilson, who is a very handsome youth of
sixteen or thereabouts. He is about five feet two or three inches; very
fair and pretty; with chestnut hair, dark blue eyes, and a set of pearly
teeth which, combined with the rosy colour of his cheeks, makes him an
almost irresistible bait to old gentlemen--or for that to young ones
too--who are addicted to the pederastic vice.

We are very much in each other's confidence, so he let me into the
secrets of his way of doing business.

One afternoon, as we were smoking and drinking champagne together, he
suddenly commenced:--

"Do you think, Jack, I ever let those old fellows have me? No fear, I
know a game worth two of that. You see, I never bring them home with me,
and in fact always affect the innocent--don't know where to go to; am
living with my father and mother at Greenwich or some out-of-the-way
part of London, and only came to the West-End to look about and see the
shops and swells, etc. If a gentleman is very pressing I never consent
to anything unless he asks me to accompany him to his house or chambers.
Once got home with him, I say, 'Now, sir, what present are you going to
make me?'

"'Stop a bit, my boy, till we see how you please me,' or something very
like that is the answer I generally get.

"'No; I'll have it now, or I'll raise the house, you old sod. Do you
think I'm a greenhorn? I want a fiver. Don't I know too well that little
boys only get five or ten shillings after it's all over? But that won't
do for me, so shell out at once, or I'll raise the house, and a pretty
scandal it will be!'

"That frightens them at once, so I almost always get at least five
pounds, and sometimes more, as I take care to write and borrow as much
as I can afterwards. There's nothing like bleeding one of these old
fellows; and young ones are better still--they are so easily
frightened."

He told me lots of tales of different people he had victimized in that
way.

My other acquaintance, George Brown, comes on a different line of
business. His plan is to pick up a swell, and ride about with him in a
cab.

Many gentlemen are too nervous to take a boy home with them, or, in
fact, to go to any house; but they like to get a young fellow in a cab,
and either frig him or get him to do it to themselves.

G. B. would do all this, and wait till his prize was quite or nearly
drunk; then rob him of his pocketbook, purse, or watch, as the case
might be, very frequently even taking the rings off his fingers if he
had any.

"Jack," he said to me the other day, "what a fool you are not to go in
for the same lay as I do. You would get hundreds where you now only get
tens.

"I had a rare lark with a Jew the other day. I knew he belonged to some
City financial firm. He was too fly to get drunk; but took me down to
the Star and Garter at Richmond on a Saturday afternoon (no doubt he had
been to his synagogue in the morning). Well, we had a first-rate dinner,
and by way of dessert I handled and sucked his rather worn-out prick
till he spent, and he did the same to me; but I don't like Jews--they
are so dark-complexioned, and both taste and smell rather strong--so I
made up my mind to make him pay well for it.

"At length when he ordered a last bottle of fizz, and took out his purse
to pay the bill, I could see he had very little more than a tenner left,
which no doubt was intended for me; and so it was. Directly the waiter
was gone out of the room, he tossed it across the table to me, saying:
'There's a little bit of paper for you, George. It's good pay for an
hour or two, my boy. I wish I could make money as easily!'

"Of course I pocketed the flimsy; but never made any remark, except:
'Is that all for what I have let you do?'

"'Why, you don't even thank me for being liberal!' he remarked rather
angrily.

"'Nothing to thank you for: I could wipe my arse on that! I mean to have
a cool hundred; as I know it's nothing to you, who can swindle more than
that any day in the City. Shall I call at your Cornhill office for it on
Monday, or will you give me an I.O.U.?'

"'You bugger! You shan't have a damn'd penny more!' he growled out,
putting on his hat. 'I'm going!'

"'Not till you square me, Mr. Simeon Moses!' I said, speaking as loudly
as possible. 'You know you have been acting indecently towards me, and
showing me a volume of the "Romance of Lust!" Would you like a bobby to
find that book on you?'

"You should have seen him start as I mentioned his real name.

"'Hush! hush! for God's sake speak a little lower! What do you want?
I'll send you the money.'

"'No you won't! I'll call for it anywhere you like to leave a hundred
quid for me; but you must give me the rings off your fingers as
security, to be returned when I get the money, on my word of honour.'

"He was too frightened not to comply at once, and told me to take them
to a certain house in a little street out of Harley Street, any time
after ten o'clock the next Sunday evening.

"I knew the house very well. It was kept by a great big bully, who had
been a soldier, so, thinking perhaps there would be a little trouble in
making him hand over the tin, I borrowed a small life-preserver from a
friend by way of precaution, then went for a settlement.

"The bully opened the door himself.

"'Has Mr. Simeon Moses left a hundred pounds for me?' I asked.

"'Your name's George Brown, I think. Step into the parlour, and I'll see
you presently,' he growled.

"Half-an-hour passed, and he still kept me waiting, so I gave a furious
ring at the bell, which brought him in swearing at me for my damn'd
impudence.

"'Now, Bill Johnson--you see, I know your name, and what's more, I know
the games you carry on here--no humbug!' (bringing out the
life-preserver and striking the table so as to make a regular mark in
the mahogany). 'Have you got the money or not? I shan't stop, and Mr.
Moses may whistle for his rings if I don't get it now!' I said, speaking
loudly.

"'Damn it! yes. Only don't make a row. But he told me only to give you
ten pounds and keep the rest!'

"'Give me ninety and keep the ten. I don't mind a fair commission,' I
replied, and so we settled it at once, and had a good laugh over the
sodding fools, as I stood a bottle of fizz."

After telling me the foregoing tale, he went on:--

"Did you ever hear that I was four years in the Reformatory at Red Hill?
That was where I first had a prick up my arse."

"No," I replied. "But do you mean to say such things can be done
there?"

"Yes," said George; "and if it had not been such a hell of a place I
should have been a good scholar. Of course, the boys are supposed to go
to school and work in the grounds. As for work, it was nearly all play;
and none of us cared for the good-natured old schoolmaster, and so never
learnt much.

"As to the sleeping arrangements, I was in what they called a
dormitory--it ought to have been called a back-door-mitory. There were
over twenty of us boys and lads in the one large room.

"As soon as we were locked in for the night, one of the biggest of them,
observing me for the first time, says: 'Hullo! here's a greenhorn. We'll
soon make a free-man of him!'

"They crowded round me, just as I had almost got my clothes off ready
to get into bed with another of about my own size (I was fifteen).

"'What's your name?' 'How long are you sent for?' 'Have you ever had a
cock up your arse?' etc., etc., was asked by one and the other of them,
and they soon found out that in the latter respect I was quite innocent.

"In a trice I was thrown upon the bed, and held down on my back whilst
all of them spat on my prick to make me a free-man; so, knowing it was
useless to resist, I took it all as good tempered as possible, and hoped
it would soon be over. But I was soon undeceived, for they proceeded to
spread-eagle me on the bed, face downwards, by tying my wrists and
ankles to the four corners of the bedstead; then a couple of pillows
were pushed under my belly, so as to raise my bottom up a little. Then
the biggest boy got up behind me and put his stiff prick to my arsehole.

"'Ah! oh! oh!! you hurt. I won't stand that. I'll tell the master in the
morning!' I screamed out, and then began to cry.

"In an instant they tied a handkerchief over my mouth, whilst someone
got hold of my prick, all greasy and slimy as it was from the spitting,
and began to frig me, whilst the one behind me was trying to get his
tool in.

"He pushed and pushed. It was impossible for me to scream, yet it was
like forcing a bar of iron up my bottom. The pricking and stretching
sensation was awful, and I do believe I should have been greatly
injured if he hadn't spent his juice, and so eased the passage a bit.
This enabled him to get right in, and I could feel his prick swelling
and palpitating inside my bottom, whilst I felt so stretched and tight
that I was really afraid for him to move.

"However, the feeling of distension went off after a bit, and it began
to feel far nicer, especially after a few gentle moves on his part; then
presently he spent again, and it felt so lovely and warm and nice, as it
shot up into me; so much so that I began to wriggle about under the
curious and pleasurable sensations he had aroused within me. My blood
was on fire, and tingled in my veins to the tips of my toes and my
finger ends, whilst their delicious frigging made me spend all over the
pillow under my belly.

"The captain of the room having thus opened up my virginity, as they
called it, had to withdraw; then one after the other got into me, and
spent so quickly that it oozed from my bum and ran down the cheeks of my
bottom, over my balls, etc. I was perfectly inundated with the slimy
mess, but enjoyed it immensely; such a succession of stiff pricks
revelling in my arse excited me so that I came again and again, as they
continued to frig me; till at last the gag was removed from my mouth,
and I was asked if I would tell the governor now, and as soon as I
answered, 'No,' they let me loose.

"All night long the boys kept the game up, either fucking each other or
sucking one another's pricks, and I can assure you I thought it was a
beautiful game, which quite reconciled me to the confinement.

"Sometimes a new boy would be obstinate; then he was sure to be treated
with the greatest possible cruelty. They would tie him down as they did
me, and then flog his buttocks with a pair of braces with the buckles on
till his rump was as raw as a beefsteak.

"It would take days to tell you of all the sprees we had at Red Hill.

"There was one young fellow, who, being rather of a superior education
to the rest, was made a junior teacher in the school. Well, do you know
the boys of his class would actually frig him as he sat at his desk to
hear their lessons, for the head schoolmaster was mostly asleep, and no
one else dared say a word. This fairly broke his health down, and he had
to go into the infirmary.

"What games there used to be in the kitchen! The head cook was a great,
strong woman of about forty, and had another woman almost like herself
as assistant, and they were allowed half-a-dozen boys to help them. They
were not always the same boys, but every morning the head cook would
select those she liked, and march them off to the kitchen, so as, she
said, to give every one a turn--and a good turn it was. We had to fuck
both the women. They would each of them do the whole half-dozen, and
fairly fuck us dry, and I have seen the boys throw them down and slap
their fat arses till they screamed for mercy; then we would bugger them
and frig them till they almost fainted from exhaustion.

"I don't mean to say that this was done every day, but perhaps once or
twice a week, when they knew the governor was gone out. He used to come
round first, and then as soon as he was gone the spree was started."

A few days ago George Brown, when a little under the influence of
Bacchus, let me partially into another secret of his, which affords a
partial clue to how so many unaccountable mysterious disappearances are
always being mentioned in the papers.

"Do you know, Jack," he said, "what I do when things are a bit slack? I
can always earn a poney (twenty-five pounds) if I take a little girl of
about fifteen to a certain house in Paris; in fact, they will give me
an extra fiver for every year she is under that age, so that a girl
between eleven and twelve is worth forty pounds and all expenses paid.
Now and then I get them a boy for a change, as they are in great demand
for the rich visitors to Paris, especially for the Americans, who are
nearly all sodomites. You heard of the case of General Ney, who shot
himself the other day? Well, he was a regular customer to a certain Mme.
R---- that I know, but they were too greedy, she and her ponce; always
wanting money, and threatening the General to tell his wife and
mother-in-law if he didn't shell out, so at last the poor fellow blew
his brains out. If the boys or girls turn out obstinate, they are
outraged with brutal violence, and then disappear no one knows how, but
I have nothing to do with that.

"A fortnight ago I went down Whitechapel way, and dropped on to such a
nice, pretty boy. He was a shoeblack, and, although only about thirteen
years of age, beautifully formed and well hung with fine light golden
hair, blue eyes and cherry lips. I fell in love with him myself. Whilst
he was blacking my boots I asked a lot of questions about what he
earned, etc., and soon found that he lived in a refuge, where they kept
nearly all he brought in every night to pay for his schooling and board,
etc., as he had no parents or relatives of any kind.

"Here was a chance for G. B., so I soon got him to promise to meet me
near Moses' shop in Aldgate in the evening, and the result was I bought
him a rig-out as a page, had his ragged-school livery made up into a
parcel and sent back to the refuge, and took him off in triumph to my
lodgings, a fresh place I engaged for that purpose that very afternoon.
He was my page, and had a little bed made up in an anteroom next my own
bedroom.

"I had four rooms en suite at three guineas a week in a nice street in
Camden Town.

"Next day I bought him some more clothes, shirts, hose, etc., and had
him well bathed; in fact, he made a handsome little gentleman when
dressed in mufti.

"He seemed delighted at the change in his prospects, and the jolly
blow-out of good things at every meal; so in the evening, after supper,
I asked him how he would like to go back to the Ragged School Refuge
again, as I did not think I should keep him very long.

"You should have seen the tears come into his beautiful eyes, as he
threw himself on his knees and begged I would keep him, that he would
die for me, and do anything he could to please me.

"It was some time before I would appear at all moved by his appeal; then
I said: 'Well, Joe, will you promise never, never, to let out any of my
secrets or what games I may play with you? Now swear it, sir, on the
Bible!'

"So I made him take a fearful oath, which I felt sure had a great effect
on him after his Sunday School teaching.

"'Bring me that small bottle of liqueur off the sideboard, Joe,' I said,
as soon as he had taken the oath. I had a little of it in some water
myself, and gave him some. You know, Jack, the stuff it is, and what an
exciting effect it has upon everyone.

"'Now I want to examine your figure,' I said, 'because I won't keep a
boy unless he is well formed everywhere; so just strip yourself, my
lad.'

"I should not have thought he had so much sense of decency; but he
blushed as scarlet as the most delicately bred youth could have done,
and the sight perfectly delighted me, as it was a proof of his being a
real virgin as yet.

"However, he did not hesitate, although the wavy blushes kept flushing
across his pretty face as he threw aside his clothes, and presently
stood quite naked before me, whilst the liqueur had such an effect that
his fine little cock, quite six inches long, was as stiff as a ramrod,
and evidently caused him considerable embarrassment.

"'Come to me, Joe. You look all right; but I must feel you all over, to
see if you have any blemishes. How's this?' I exclaimed, touching his
prick with my hand. 'Is it always sticking up like that? Put your hand
into my trousers. You won't find me so. It's awfully rude, sir!'

"He was afraid of displeasing me, or I should never have got him to
unbutton my trousers and put his hand on my prick; but he did, and
pulled it out to view, as I ordered him to do. It was limp, but I knew
his touch would have the magic effect very soon.

"'There, sir,' I said, 'why are you different to me? See if you can
make me the same. Take the head in your mouth, and draw back the skin.'

"I could see he did not like it, but did it to please me. The touch of
his warm lips and the soft pressure of his hand brought me up in a
moment. It quite filled his small mouth; but I placed my hands on his
head, and ordering him to suck it, and tickle it with his tongue, kept
him to his task till the crisis came, and I almost choked the pretty
fellow with my spendings.

"'Ah, oh, delightful! It's heavenly, Joe. If you please me like that
I'll never part with you, my dear boy!' I exclaimed, carried away by my
feelings. 'Here; kiss me, my dear boy!' as I raised him on my lap, and
glued my lips to his, sucking my own spendings out of his mouth. 'It
was so awfully delicious, Jack!'

"'Did that give you such pleasure, sir?' he asked in a kind of whisper.

"'Yes, Joe, my darling. I'll make you feel the same for yourself
presently,' was my reply. 'You shall sleep with me, and we will now go
to bed as soon as I am undressed. Take your clothes into your own room,
and come back to me naked, just as you are.'

"We both got on to my bed in a state of beauty unadorned, and I sucked
his little cock till I felt sure he must come soon, then, kneeling up on
all fours, I ordered him to shove it into my bottom. He was too excited
not to be ready to do anything I told him at once, and besides, there
was no difficulty about his getting into me, as I could take a much
bigger affair than his. Still, my fancy was awfully excited at the idea
of having his virginity, and to think that his maiden spend would be in
my arse.

"The little fellow came quite naturally to the business, and fucked me
so beautifully that I spent in his hands as they clasped round my body
and held my prick as I had directed him to do; then presently his shoves
became more rapid and eager, and I felt his warm sperm shoot right up
into me in a delicious jet of love juice, as he almost fainted on my
back from the excess of emotion it caused him.

"'Oh! oh! what is it? How funny, how nice to feel so!' he ejaculated,
between laughing and sighing. 'Oh! I suppose that it's the same kind of
pleasure that you felt when I sucked you.'

"'Now, Joe,' I replied, 'you know what it is like, you will let me do it
to you. Isn't it beautiful?'

"He kissed me, and told me I might do anything I liked with him, he
loved me so; only he feared my big affair could never be got into his
small bottom, and I could see he was rather afraid of the attempt. But I
soon reassured him, and got him to kneel up for me as I had done for
him; then, anointing the delicious looking pink hole with some cold
cream, I brought Mr. Pego to the charge. At first I could make no
impression; but having got my finger in, and opened up the way a little,
I succeeded in getting a slight lodgment, which made him scream with
pain and apprehension, especially when I began to push on a little
further.

"'Ah! oh! dear sir! Oh! oh! pray don't; you'll split me! Oh! oh!' etc.

"Being afraid his cries would be heard, I reached a pocket handkerchief,
and before he knew what I was about, had him effectually gagged.

"It was managed without losing my place, then with one hand putting a
little more of the cold cream on the shaft of my prick, I gave a
tremendous shove, and got a little further in. It must have been awfully
painful, for he writhed and struggled to free himself from me, and went
flat on the bed with a deep sigh, which would have been a scream but for
the gag.

"The fact that I was inflicting awful pain only added to my lust, and
regardless of consequences I pushed on till his virgin bottom had been
completely ravished, and I could see little drops of blood ooze from him
at every motion of my prick, which was also stained with blood, sperm,
etc.

"I had spent; but the idea was so exciting that I kept on till I had
done it three times, and the tight aperture became quite easy, and I
felt the gag might be removed with safety.

"From what I could see of his face he was both crying and laughing in an
hysterical state, so I thought I had better stop for that night at
least, and it was a long time before I could bring him round to perfect
sensibility.

"I had him again the next night, but it was awfully painful to poor Joe;
then I took him to Paris and sold him for a hundred pounds--he was so
handsome I wouldn't take less.

"Did you ever hear there is a small and very select club in Paris, where
they practise every kind of cruelty, and even sometimes kill their
victims. That's where, I believe, the refractory victims are finished
off, but I don't know much for certain."

There are many more like young Wilson and George Brown, who have
particular specialities for turning the pederastic vice to account, but
I will now go on with my own experiences:--

Not long ago I had a rather mysterious note, asking me to call upon a
gentleman at his chambers in Brook Street, Grosvenor Square. I soon
found out that he was a young nobleman of great wealth, so made up my
mind to wait upon him. He went by the name of Mr. Carton, and received
me so graciously, and without the least ostentation, so that I was
perfectly at ease with him from the very first moment.

"I heard of you, Mr. Saul, from a friend of mine who is a member of a
certain club you visit. They call you Eveline, do they not?" he
remarked, as soon as I had taken a seat.

Receiving my affirmative reply, he went on: "Then we perfectly
understand each other. I require your assistance in a little delicate
business, which I would not mention had I not been very well assured of
your discretion. Of course, you know, I shall pay handsomely. The fact
is I come of a very curious family. Both my father and mother (whom I
need not mention) had most peculiarly erotic fancies, so I suppose that
it is born in us. I am the youngest--not yet attained my majority--and
have two sisters, one twenty-two and the other twenty-three years of
age, and as beautiful as they are amiable, yet as lustful devils as
angels can by any possibility be. The eldest seduced me, her brother,
before I was sixteen, and soon let her sister into the secret.

"They are too wise to be fucked in the regular way. (God only knows how
they came to know so much, but I suspect our French master, as he taught
me a thing or two besides my lessons.)

"Well, as soon as they had made me their own, I had to bugger them, or
let them gamahuche me, whilst I did the same to them. It has gone on for
a long time. They are both considerable heiresses, and determined never
to marry and lose their liberty, but they find me quite insufficient to
keep pace with their lustful ideas, so I want you to give me your
assistance.

"We have got the most beautiful dildoes possible to be obtained in
Paris, with which they fuck my bottom, whilst I do the same to either
Emma or Eliza, as the case may be; but we are all of opinion that the
real living instrument is so much to be preferred. By the bye, did you
ever fit on a dildoe just above your own prick, and fuck a girl with it
in her cunt, whilst at the same time you bugger her bum-hole with your
pego? That is what I often do for them, and I think it must be awfully
delicious, to judge from the state of excitement it throws them into;
and besides, I myself, by stretching the imagination a little, fancy it
is a real man's prick which I can feel rubbing against mine, with only
the thin membrane (almost as fine as a French letter, which you know is
the sole division between the two holes), between the two pricks. It's
so delicious!

"You make up as a beautiful girl, and let them find out your male
furniture as the game developes itself, and let the direction of affairs
take its chance. They have a fancy for indulging in a little
flagellation this evening if I can procure them a subject. They have
read so much about it in books, especially in the "Birchen Bouquet,"
that they think it will add materially to their lustful appetites if
they can flay a girl's bum by way of a prelude. You will catch it
smartly, but the guerdon shall be equal to the pain. Are you agreable?
If so, go home and dress; then be here about 10 p.m. You will be shown
up at once. Take the name of Miss Eveline Birch if you like."

He gave me a fifty-pound note, and said he hoped I would be punctual to
the time named, which I assured him I would be.

I had enjoyed the thrilling effects of the rod too well when
administered by Boulton at his apartments, so I now readily agreed to
Mr. Carton's proposal, who, when I returned at the appointed time, I
found with two beautiful young ladies.

"Allow me to introduce you, Miss Birch," he said, placing a chair for
me, "to my two sisters, Lady Emma and Lady Eliza Carton. My dears, this
is Miss Eveline Birch, the naughty girl who has come to be punished. Her
papa and mamma have given me carte blanche to whip her till she
confesses her liaison with a young officer in the Guards and promises
never to speak to him again. Won't it be fun, dears? But not for her. I
rather guess it will be a serious business for her delicate etceteras;
you understand what I mean."

"Then don't give her time to think about it," said Lady Emma, as she and
her sister rose in a very stately manner from their seats. "We are going
into the next room, and shall be ready for her in two or three minutes.
You had better give her a glass of wine to keep up her spirits."

I had hardly time to swallow a second glass, as Mr. Carton said they
meant real business and would be back in a jiffey, before they threw
open the door and reappeared, each of them having discarded her dress.
They had only on their white petticoats, set off by handsome corsets,
which displayed all the glories of their splendid bosoms to the best
effect; and when I add that they were both lovely brunettes, with
blue-black hair, dark hazel eyes set under splendidly arched dark
eyebrows; long, drooping eyelashes; cheeks like a mixture of milk and
roses; and the whole set off by ruby lips and pearly teeth, you may
imagine it was a sight to move St. Anthony himself, especially if he
could have caught a glimpse as I did of fine knickerbocker drawers,
trimmed with costly lace, and lovely legs and feet in white silk
stockings and Parisian boots, high-heeled and sparkling with diamond
buckles.

Each had a lovely swishtail of birch in her right hand; not heavy rods,
but just four or five pliant twigs of considerable length, elegantly
tied together with blue velvet and magenta ribbons.

Advancing to me, "Come, Miss Eveline," said Lady Emma, "allow us to
conduct you to punishment. We have a nice ladder in the next room, and
our brother here shall enjoy the sight of your humiliation and
disgrace."

"You shan't whip me! I didn't know what I was sent here for. No; indeed
I won't, ladies! touch me if you dare!" I exclaimed. "Let me go! I've
had enough of such nonsense!"

"Here, Walter, help us," they appealed to their brother. "She shall
soon change her tune, the impudent hussey! What a joke to think she
didn't expect it!"

Mr. Carton, who had placed himself before the door to prevent my
attempted retreat, threw off his coat, and then all three seized and
dragged me, in spite of my pretended resistance, as I cried and screamed
by turns. Their excitement seemed to give them extraordinary strength,
and I was soon fastened up by my hands to the ladder, and my dress, all
in tatters from the struggle, was at once pinned up round my waist, then
my drawers were opened behind, just as I found one ankle tied by some
kind of cord to the bottom of the ladder.

"That's right, Eliza," cried Lady Emma. "Leave the other foot loose.
Now the wicked girl shall get her deserts--my arm shall ache before I
give over whipping her! What a horribly fast girl she must be to flirt
and go on with officers of the Guards! How do you like that, Miss
Eveline? and that? and that?" giving my poor bum three terribly sharp
cuts.

I bit my lips to restrain any cries.

"Ha, you don't speak. Just let the naughty girl's drawers down to her
knees, will you, Eliza dear?"

"Why, she's a man!" almost screamed Lady Eliza, when the drawers were
let loose. "Look, sister! look! Don't spare the horrid creature!"

They both blushed deeply, especially when they saw that their brother
had prepared a surprise, and was rather enjoying their confusion.

Lady Emma muttered something about "Dirty wretch, I'll pay him out!"
and then, suddenly recovering herself, rained a perfect shower of cuts
on my poor rump, whilst Lady Eliza, also seemingly in a great rage, took
up another rod and helped her sister to cut me up.

How I screamed, and fairly yelled for mercy. "Oh, for heaven's sake, do,
do forgive me, ladies! Your brother made me do it, and now sits there
laughing at me! I beg your pardon. Oh! oh! oh! indeed I do!"

Mr. Carton was almost beside himself with excitement, and had got out
his prick to frig himself. It was a beautiful specimen, about eight
inches long, with a fine ruby head.

Their blows never relaxed; the small tips of the twigs cut round my
buttocks till I was fairly excoriated and bleeding all over from the
small of my back to the middle of my thighs, and the blood trickled down
my legs, whilst neither prick nor balls escaped their merciless attack.
Still, it was not so awful as one would imagine. The pain soon became
dulled, and then was succeeded by a beautiful glow; such a lovely
sensation--it is almost impossible to describe--pervaded my whole frame,
and they must have seen it indicated in my face, for, throwing aside
their rods, they let me loose, and embraced me with tears in their eyes.

Mr. Carton threw off all his clothes, and tore off the petticoats and
every rag of covering from his two beautiful sisters.

Lady Emma was my mark at once, for she threw herself over a bed,
projecting out her rump, which I considered an invitation to me to
attack her lovely bottom. My cock was in such a furious state of lust
and so distended, but I never gave that a thought.

How she winced as she first felt the hot head charging the tight little
brown hole! but putting one hand behind her with a little cold cream on
one finger, she greased the end of Mr. Pego; then, taking him in hand
herself, directed my engine of love to the wrinkled entrance.

How bravely she met my attack; but it was soon effectual, and I glided
into Paradise--such a warm, tight, juicy sheath throbbed upon and held
my delighted prick! I was going to enjoy the sense of possession for a
few moments, but was startled by a smart attack on my own sore bum; the
cheeks were pulled apart, and I felt the head of Mr. Carton's affair
battering for admission; then one hand was passed round to my front,
where it groped to feel how I was getting on in his lovely sister.

This made me look round, and I then saw that Lady Eliza had fitted on a
dildoe, and was just ready to get into her brother's bottom. What a
luscious scene that was; and how lovely the two aristocratic young
ladies looked!

He was into me in less time than I can write it, and the exciting
effects of the previous flagellation made me almost beside myself. Each
shove I gave into the bottom of the lovely Lady Emma I had a
corresponding one from her handsome brother, who was pushed on to do his
best by Lady Eliza behind.

A very few of these thrilling motions brought us all to a crisis. I
felt his warm sperm shooting up to my very soul, just as my own
spendings did the same for his sister, and we kept the same position
till we all came together again.

After this luscious bout the two sisters sucked our pricks till we were
as stiff as ever, then each of us fitted on a dildoe, and had them so in
both holes at once, but I had the Lady Eliza for a change. Giving full
scope to my imagination in this conjunction, I fully realized all the
delights of which Mr. Carton had spoken at my first interview with him.
It was indeed delicious to feel, as it were, two pricks rubbing against
each other inside the dear girl, with only the thin membrane between
them.

After this we made the two sisters lean forward and present their
posteriors over the edge of the bed; then we made both of them feel a
little of the realities of birching, till they fairly cried for mercy,
and begged us once more to let them have our dear pricks in their
bottoms.

That is how we passed the first night, and ever since I have been quite
a favourite with them and their brother.


[Illustration: Decoration]




THE SAME OLD STORY

[Illustration]

ARSES PREFERRED TO CUNTS

[Illustration]


Since Nero had his mother, and Caligula fucked his horse, I believe that
incest, sodomy, and bestiality have been fashionable vices.

I know one man, a Q.C., who regularly keeps a goat, which he prefers to
either man or woman.

Another, a young nobleman of twenty, acts the part of OEdipus, and is
passionately in love with, and fucks his own mother. Still, no doubt
sodomy bears away the palm over all other vices.

I know a recent case in which a widow, keeping a small shop near
Leicester Square, had a lodger who occupied her first floor for the last
three years. Recently one evening after shutting up, she fancied she
heard a noise in the front passage, but could see nothing, so as the man
who usually put up the shutters for her had not gone, she asked him to
wait a little while in the kitchen and listen. After about half-an-hour
he fancied that he heard shuffling and whispering in the passage, so
taking off his boots, he crept softly upstairs, and suddenly striking a
match, saw Mr. Parsons, the first floor lodger, in the very act of
getting into the bottom of a soldier, who had his breeches down and at
once bolted out of the door without waiting to put himself in decent
order. The lodger slunk upstairs, and took his leave next day.

Just as this is going to press there is a case in the London _Daily
Telegraph_ of July 9, 1881, in which a corporal of the Scots Guards is
caught in the act of committing an unnatural offence at a coffee house
in Lower Sloane Street. He gets committed for trial, whilst his
companion, who has the luck to be Secretary to the German Embassy in
London, is claimed to be dealt with by the German Government, and sent
home to Vaterland, which is no doubt all that will happen to him.

The prevalence of sodomy amongst schoolboys is little suspected of being
so general as it really is. Only lately a medical man of large practice
was called in to consult with the master of a large academy, where it
appears the scholars had learnt something much more interesting than
Latin or Greek. His tale is given just as he related it to the doctor.

"A day or two ago, sir, my suspicions were aroused as to something
highly improper going on in the sleeping rooms at night, so I determined
to find out all the facts by ocular demonstration. Having several
vacancies in the school, there happened to be a small room of three beds
quite empty.

"This I availed myself of, and on Wednesday afternoon, when all were
out in the cricket-field, I made some peepholes, so that they gave me a
full view into two rooms on either side.

"The little room was supposed to be locked up, and also the master
(myself) was thought not to be at home; so I slipped upstairs a couple
of hours before bedtime, and locked myself in.

"By-and-bye they all came laughing upstairs, accompanied by two young
ushers, one of whom slept in each room to keep order.

"By standing on the beds I had a full view of everything going on.

"'Now, Mr. Smith, let's see if your prick is sore after having three of
us last night!' I heard one of the biggest boys say, and looking into
the room, there was a rare romp going on. Four boys had thrown Smith on
a bed, and were trying to unbutton his trousers, and at last got out his
cock--it was a good size, and stiff as possible. I then saw Charley
Johnson, a boy of fifteen, take it in his mouth and suck it, whilst
another boy did the same with his pego, and so on till every one but the
usher had a prick in his mouth.

"I was too spellbound by the sight to make a noise or interfere. The
fact is, doctor, I couldn't help frigging myself; and we all seemed to
come at the same time.

"After this they began to quietly undress, so I took a peep into the
other room, and there, by God, sir, the boys were fucking each other's
arses! It drove me nearly wild. If I don't stop it they will draw me
into their practices, and I can't resist the temptation my peepholes
afford; so what is to be done I don't know. Besides, my school would be
ruined if it were found out."

The doctor advised the schoolmaster to have every one, ushers as well as
pupils, medically examined one by one, and then he (the doctor), would
pretend to find out from appearances all they had been doing, and try to
frighten them out of doing it again by describing all the awful effects
of pederasty.

Wouldn't many of our readers have liked the doctor's job?


[Illustration: Decoration]




A SHORT ESSAY ON SODOMY, ETC.


Sodomy appears to have been one of the most important of the Roman vices
and amusements; it was not by any means considered improper. We are
speaking of sodomy with males, for we do not find anything much said
about sodomy with women in the literature of the Roman day.

We say now a woman is all cunt, and the Marquis de Sade says that he
must be a beginner indeed who has not had a boy, or made a boy his
mistress. Martial treats sodomy with women good naturedly, and no doubt
the Romans practised it. Many moderns are given to having women in the
bottom, and most men who have gone in for anything like dissipation have
done it now and then, and we sometimes hear of marriages being made
unhappy from that unfortunate taste in the husband; but we think that
with modern Europeans (except in Turkey, Greece, and part of Italy) it
is quite the exception to find a man wedded to that practice; but with
the ancient Romans it must have been a vice too common to be even
alluded to.

If women are all cunt now what must they have been then?

Sodomy with males, with the above exceptions, is still rarer in the
present day, and although we have made the most careful research, we do
not know of many professional male sodomites in London; and when we were
boys we remember a gentleman who kept a tall young fellow, a Creole,
near Leicester Square. Our criminal reports show that such things do
take place, and it is not long since that I was in court and heard a
gipsy found guilty, first of all of having his own donkey, and
afterwards a neighbour's little boy.

The offence is common in France. Ambrose Tardieu speaks of having
investigated two hundred and seventeen cases of passive sodomy--not
always cases of French subjects--and speaks of the extraordinary
enlargement of the _sphincter ani_ arising therefrom. The vice is
evidently attractive, from the number of things different admirers of it
have inserted in their anus, in default of something better, such as
knitting-needles, bottles and glasses; and he especially speaks of
bottles of Hungary waters and eau de Cologne being inserted in the
bottom-hole, also pieces of wood, and he mentions that in the latter
case the whole fist of the surgeon could be introduced into the anus.

Another person, for a bet, put a tumbler up his bottom; and two
children, the brother five years old and the sister seven, were caught
one day putting spoons, carrots, and potatoes up each other's bottoms;
and he mentions that the anus of the little girl was so dilated that it
was nearly confounded with her vagina.

These facts give us some idea of the enlargement of the anus that may
arise from sodomy, and help to explain some of Martial's epigrams.

There have also been some interesting remarks privately published by a
recent traveller through the realms of the King of Bokhara.

He speaks of that monarch having two wings to his harem, one for boys
and one for girls. When the King would have connexion with one of his
boys, the latter is well purged and brought to the King fasting, scents
and oil being injected up his bottom. Then the boy has his dinner to
give him courage and spirits to amuse the King, after which his Majesty
has the boy in the presence generally of two or three of the royal
wives. This traveller speaks of the salacious ways of these boys, the
enlargement of their bottom-holes, and growths around the orifice, which
made it appear very like the private parts of a woman.

Tardieu speaks of this growth too, but he also speaks of other
developments, as well as the consequences of passive sodomy, such as
piles and various disagreeable matters. We think, too, that the King of
Bokhara's habit of purging his boys before having connexion with them
corroborates Tardieu's statement and the observations of many others,
that the effect of being continually buggered (and Tardieu suggests as
well the use of laxative ointments), is to so relax the _sphincter ani_
that it will not retain the faeces.

In the most civilized places of the present day sodomy with males is
rarely practised--with females it is practised oftener; but in Rome it
was the habit, the recognized habit, and it only became hateful when the
man always received the attention and never gave. In those days men
loved a lusty fellow as much as women do now, and the lusty fellow could
give as much pleasure to a man as he could to a woman, and be thought
none the worse for it.

The vice was so general and fashionable that the chastest of the Cæsars,
Augustus, was charged by many mouths with practising it; but Suetonius
says, excepting his weakness for deflowering little girls, all the
charges brought against him were calumnies.

Tiberius revelled in sodomy, and was surrounded by lusty Catamites, and
rendered his name imperishable by indelibly connecting it with the
Spintriæ. At this chaste court Vitellus was apprenticed, and soon
acquired the name of Spintria, raising his family by his prostitution,
and showing when he in his time came to the throne, what a long train of
evil one bad man in power can lay.

Caligula's mutual prostitutions with his pantomimic friend were well
known, as was also his connexion with certain hostages; and the state of
Roman decency may be presumed when we are told that V. Catullus, a young
man of consular family, bawled out publicly that he had been having the
Emperor until his back ached.

Cladius stuck to women, although he saw no harm in boys being debauched.
Even his own son-in-law (to show the prevalence of the vice), we may
observe, was stabbed and murdered while in the act of having his
favourite boy.

Nero, of course, is not behindhand, and shows himself a true Roman
Emperor by having the young Aulus Plautius by force, and then having him
executed--the terrible result of worn-out desires, the irresistible
impulse to remove from the face of the earth the man or woman you have
satiated yourself with.

Our old friend Vitellus, when he came to the throne, managed the state
entirely by the advice of the lowest classes, at the head of whom was
the freedman Asiaticus, and his cabinet council was nothing but a series
of mutual and unnatural pollutions.

Leaving Titus and the Eunuch, and Catamites, we will say one word on
Galba, who bears the palm of Roman sodomites. He had no taste for women,
nor had many a better man. He liked males, which was nothing uncommon;
but he only fancied them when they were past their prime, and there he
stood alone in his sodomy--he had not even the excuse of saying that the
plump hips and smooth face of the boy resembled a girl. As another
celebrated piece of royalty was fond of bad oysters, his taste was for
old men--for men who had lived too long to enjoy pleasure or to give
pleasure to anyone. But Galba, even when old Icelas brought the news of
Nero's death, as he was sitting surrounded by friends, rose, kissed the
old gentleman, and requesting him to make "a clear coast," led him into
a private room, and had him. We can only say it would have been much
more like Galba, if he had had the old gentlemen there and then before
all the company.


[Illustration: Decoration]




TRIBADISM


Dogging the heels of sodomy walks tribadism, a vice which every man in
his heart looks on with kindly eyes. This sister vice appears to have
existed from all ages. It is at least as old as sodomy, and still
lives, aye, flourishes amongst the supposed modest maidens of our day.
In all civilized Europe it exists among single women who have been
debarred from men, generally in a narrowed sense, rarely taking other
form than mutual frigging. But amongst some prostitutes of the upper
class, and a few matrons of educated vicious tastes, it flourishes, the
Frenchwomen bearing the palm. In the latter case gamahuching comes into
free play; one woman loves another as jealously as ever a man could, and
we have known instances in England of great unhappiness ensuing from one
tribade giving up her inamorata for another man or woman; and in one
memorable instance the forlorn one taking a revenge that very nearly
involved the ruin of both.

The Count de Grammont mentions an instance in his memoirs of Miss
Hobart, a maid of honour at the court of Charles the Second, being
forbidden the royal presence for endeavouring to violate another maid of
honour.

It is not clear how she was doing it, and it certainly is a mystery why
that debauched monarch should have been so severe upon her.

No one can read Juvenal without being convinced that in Martial's time
tribadism flourished in Rome. His descriptions of the feasts of the Bona
Dea leave no doubt of it.

If he did leave any doubt Martial clears it up by the pointedness of
some of his epigrams. It flourished even to women with enlarged
clitorises (hermaphrodites) having boys.

This is perfectly rational. Sodomy and tribadism go hand in hand. Where
one reigns the other flourishes, and in their development they are
nearly identical vices. Boys debarred from women frig themselves, frig
each other, and then have each other, and are fortunate if they do not
grow up to be sodomites. Girls debarred from men do the same with their
own sex, and bloom into perfect tribades by a gamahuche.

This is one end of the stick; the other is as when a man, having plunged
into all the possible debauchery with females, at last resorts to
sodomy, or where a woman, say a prostitute of good position with many
friends, gets satiated and tired when she has exhausted every letch of
the male fancy; then she turns to her own sex for a new and piquant
pleasure.

It is not long since we were sitting in a café in the Haymarket when a
Frenchwoman of about thirty walked across the room to a young English
girl and offered her ten shillings to be allowed to kiss her cunt.


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Sins of the Cities of the Plain, by Jack Saul

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SINS OF CITIES OF THE PLAIN ***

***** This file should be named 53964-8.txt or 53964-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/9/6/53964/

Produced by M.K., Martin Pettit, Stanford University,
British Library and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by Stanford University.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
